	
Page semi-protected
Banana
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
This article is about sweet bananas. For the genus to which banana plants belong, see Musa (genus). For starchier bananas used in cooking, see Cooking banana. For other uses, see Banana (disambiguation).
Fruits of four different banana cultivars

A banana is an edible fruit – botanically a berry[1][2] – produced by several kinds of large herbaceous flowering plants in the genus Musa.[3] In some countries, bananas used for cooking may be called plantains, in contrast to dessert bananas. The fruit is variable in size, color, and firmness, but is usually elongated and curved, with soft flesh rich in starch covered with a rind, which may be green, yellow, red, purple, or brown when ripe. The fruits grow in clusters hanging from the top of the plant. Almost all modern edible parthenocarpic (seedless) bananas come from two wild species – Musa acuminata and Musa balbisiana. The scientific names of most cultivated bananas are Musa acuminata, Musa balbisiana, and Musa × paradisiaca for the hybrid Musa acuminata × M. balbisiana, depending on their genomic constitution. The old scientific name Musa sapientum is no longer used.

Musa species are native to tropical Indomalaya and Australia, and are likely to have been first domesticated in Papua New Guinea.[4][5] They are grown in 135 countries,[6] primarily for their fruit, and to a lesser extent to make fiber, banana wine, and banana beer and as ornamental plants. The world's largest producers of bananas in 2016 were India and China, which together accounted for 28% of total production.

Worldwide, there is no sharp distinction between "bananas" and "plantains". Especially in the Americas and Europe, "banana" usually refers to soft, sweet, dessert bananas, particularly those of the Cavendish group, which are the main exports from banana-growing countries. By contrast, Musa cultivars with firmer, starchier fruit are called "plantains". In other regions, such as Southeast Asia, many more kinds of banana are grown and eaten, so the binary distinction is not useful and is not made in local languages.

The term "banana" is also used as the common name for the plants that produce the fruit.[3] This can extend to other members of the genus Musa, such as the scarlet banana (Musa coccinea), the pink banana (Musa velutina), and the Fe'i bananas. It can also refer to members of the genus Ensete, such as the snow banana (Ensete glaucum) and the economically important false banana (Ensete ventricosum). Both genera are in the banana family, Musaceae.

Contents

    1 Description
    2 Etymology
    3 Taxonomy
    4 Bananas and plantains
    5 Historical cultivation
        5.1 Early cultivation
        5.2 Plantation cultivation in the Caribbean, Central and South America
        5.3 Peasant cultivation for export in the Caribbean
        5.4 East Africa
    6 Modern cultivation
        6.1 Cavendish
        6.2 Ripening
        6.3 Storage and transport
    7 Production and export
        7.1 Developing countries
    8 Pests, diseases, and natural disasters
        8.1 Panama disease
            8.1.1 Tropical race 4
        8.2 Black sigatoka
            8.2.1 In East Africa
        8.3 Banana bunchy top virus
        8.4 Banana bacterial wilt
    9 Nutrition
    10 Culture
        10.1 Food and cooking
            10.1.1 Fruit
            10.1.2 Flower
            10.1.3 Leaves
            10.1.4 Trunk
        10.2 Fiber
            10.2.1 Textiles
            10.2.2 Paper
        10.3 Cultural roles
            10.3.1 Arts
            10.3.2 Religion and popular beliefs
            10.3.3 Racist symbol
            10.3.4 Unicode
        10.4 Other uses
    11 Gallery
    12 References
    13 Bibliography
    14 Further reading
    15 External links

Description
Photo of a banana corm growing from loamy soil
A banana corm, about 25 cm (10 in) across
A banana farm in Chinawal, India
Young banana plant

The banana plant is the largest herbaceous flowering plant.[7] All the above-ground parts of a banana plant grow from a structure usually called a "corm".[8] Plants are normally tall and fairly sturdy, and are often mistaken for trees, but what appears to be a trunk is actually a "false stem" or pseudostem. Bananas grow in a wide variety of soils, as long as the soil is at least 60 cm deep, has good drainage and is not compacted.[9] The leaves of banana plants are composed of a "stalk" (petiole) and a blade (lamina). The base of the petiole widens to form a sheath; the tightly packed sheaths make up the pseudostem, which is all that supports the plant. The edges of the sheath meet when it is first produced, making it tubular. As new growth occurs in the centre of the pseudostem the edges are forced apart.[10] Cultivated banana plants vary in height depending on the variety and growing conditions. Most are around 5 m (16 ft) tall, with a range from 'Dwarf Cavendish' plants at around 3 m (10 ft) to 'Gros Michel' at 7 m (23 ft) or more.[11][12] Leaves are spirally arranged and may grow 2.7 metres (8.9 ft) long and 60 cm (2.0 ft) wide.[1] They are easily torn by the wind, resulting in the familiar frond look.[13]

When a banana plant is mature, the corm stops producing new leaves and begins to form a flower spike or inflorescence. A stem develops which grows up inside the pseudostem, carrying the immature inflorescence until eventually it emerges at the top.[14] Each pseudostem normally produces a single inflorescence, also known as the "banana heart". (More are sometimes produced; an exceptional plant in the Philippines produced five.[15]) After fruiting, the pseudostem dies, but offshoots will normally have developed from the base, so that the plant as a whole is perennial. In the plantation system of cultivation, only one of the offshoots will be allowed to develop in order to maintain spacing.[16] The inflorescence contains many bracts (sometimes incorrectly referred to as petals) between rows of flowers. The female flowers (which can develop into fruit) appear in rows further up the stem (closer to the leaves) from the rows of male flowers. The ovary is inferior, meaning that the tiny petals and other flower parts appear at the tip of the ovary.[17]

The banana fruits develop from the banana heart, in a large hanging cluster, made up of tiers (called "hands"), with up to 20 fruit to a tier. The hanging cluster is known as a bunch, comprising 3–20 tiers, or commercially as a "banana stem", and can weigh 30–50 kilograms (66–110 lb). Individual banana fruits (commonly known as a banana or "finger") average 125 grams (0.276 lb), of which approximately 75% is water and 25% dry matter (nutrient table, lower right).

The fruit has been described as a "leathery berry".[18] There is a protective outer layer (a peel or skin) with numerous long, thin strings (the phloem bundles), which run lengthwise between the skin and the edible inner portion. The inner part of the common yellow dessert variety can be split lengthwise into three sections that correspond to the inner portions of the three carpels by manually deforming the unopened fruit.[19] In cultivated varieties, the seeds are diminished nearly to non-existence; their remnants are tiny black specks in the interior of the fruit.[20]

Bananas are naturally slightly radioactive,[21] more so than most other fruits, because of their potassium content and the small amounts of the isotope potassium-40 found in naturally occurring potassium.[22] The banana equivalent dose of radiation is sometimes used in nuclear communication to compare radiation levels and exposures.[23]
Etymology

The word banana is thought to be of West African origin, possibly from the Wolof word banaana, and passed into English via Spanish or Portuguese.[24]
Taxonomy
The Musa 'Nendran' cultivar grown widely in the Indian state of Kerala is a member of the AAB cultivar group

The genus Musa was created by Carl Linnaeus in 1753.[25] The name may be derived from Antonius Musa, physician to the Emperor Augustus, or Linnaeus may have adapted the Arabic word for banana, mauz.[26] The old biological name Musa sapientum = "Muse of the wise" arose because of homophony in Latin with the classical Muses.

Musa is in the family Musaceae. The APG III system assigns Musaceae to the order Zingiberales, part of the commelinid clade of the monocotyledonous flowering plants. Some 70 species of Musa were recognized by the World Checklist of Selected Plant Families as of January 2013;[25] several produce edible fruit, while others are cultivated as ornamentals.[27]

The classification of cultivated bananas has long been a problematic issue for taxonomists. Linnaeus originally placed bananas into two species based only on their uses as food: Musa sapientum for dessert bananas and Musa paradisiaca for plantains. More species names were added, but this approach proved to be inadequate for the number of cultivars in the primary center of diversity of the genus, Southeast Asia. Many of these cultivars were given names that were later discovered to be synonyms.[28]

In a series of papers published from 1947 onwards, Ernest Cheesman showed that Linnaeus's Musa sapientum and Musa paradisiaca were cultivars and descendants of two wild seed-producing species, Musa acuminata and Musa balbisiana, both first described by Luigi Aloysius Colla.[29] Cheesman recommended the abolition of Linnaeus's species in favor of reclassifying bananas according to three morphologically distinct groups of cultivars – those primarily exhibiting the botanical characteristics of Musa balbisiana, those primarily exhibiting the botanical characteristics of Musa acuminata, and those with characteristics of both.[28] Researchers Norman Simmonds and Ken Shepherd proposed a genome-based nomenclature system in 1955. This system eliminated almost all the difficulties and inconsistencies of the earlier classification of bananas based on assigning scientific names to cultivated varieties. Despite this, the original names are still recognized by some authorities today, leading to confusion.[29][30]

The accepted scientific names for most groups of cultivated bananas are Musa acuminata Colla and Musa balbisiana Colla for the ancestral species, and Musa × paradisiaca L. for the hybrid M. acuminata × M. balbisiana.[31]

Synonyms of M. × paradisica include

    a large number of subspecific and varietial names of M. × paradisiaca, including M. p. subsp. sapientum (L.) Kuntze
    Musa × dacca Horan.
    Musa × sapidisiaca K.C.Jacob, nom. superfl.
    Musa × sapientum L., and a large number of its varietal names, including M. × sapientum var. paradisiaca (L.) Baker, nom. illeg.

Generally, modern classifications of banana cultivars follow Simmonds and Shepherd's system. Cultivars are placed in groups based on the number of chromosomes they have and which species they are derived from. Thus the Latundan banana is placed in the AAB Group, showing that it is a triploid derived from both M. acuminata (A) and M. balbisiana (B). For a list of the cultivars classified under this system, see "List of banana cultivars".

In 2012, a team of scientists announced they had achieved a draft sequence of the genome of Musa acuminata.[32]
Bananas and plantains

In regions such as North America and Europe, Musa fruits offered for sale can be divided into "bananas" and "plantains", based on their intended use as food. Thus the banana producer and distributor Chiquita produces publicity material for the American market which says that "a plantain is not a banana". The stated differences are that plantains are more starchy and less sweet; they are eaten cooked rather than raw; they have thicker skin, which may be green, yellow or black; and they can be used at any stage of ripeness.[33] Linnaeus made the same distinction between plantains and bananas when first naming two "species" of Musa.[34] Members of the "plantain subgroup" of banana cultivars, most important as food in West Africa and Latin America, correspond to the Chiquita description, having long pointed fruit. They are described by Ploetz et al. as "true" plantains, distinct from other cooking bananas.[35] The cooking bananas of East Africa belong to a different group, the East African Highland bananas,[12] so would not qualify as "true" plantains on this definition.
Cavendish bananas are the most common dessert bananas sold

An alternative approach divides bananas into dessert bananas and cooking bananas, with plantains being one of the subgroups of cooking bananas.[36] Triploid cultivars derived solely from M. acuminata are examples of "dessert bananas", whereas triploid cultivars derived from the hybrid between M. acuminata and M. balbinosa (in particular the plantain subgroup of the AAB Group) are "plantains".[37][38] Small farmers in Colombia grow a much wider range of cultivars than large commercial plantations. A study of these cultivars showed that they could be placed into at least three groups based on their characteristics: dessert bananas, non-plantain cooking bananas, and plantains, although there were overlaps between dessert and cooking bananas.[39]

In Southeast Asia – the center of diversity for bananas, both wild and cultivated – the distinction between "bananas" and "plantains" does not work, according to Valmayor et al. Many bananas are used both raw and cooked. There are starchy cooking bananas which are smaller than those eaten raw. The range of colors, sizes and shapes is far wider than in those grown or sold in Africa, Europe or the Americas.[34] Southeast Asian languages do not make the distinction between "bananas" and "plantains" that is made in English (and Spanish). Thus both Cavendish cultivars, the classic yellow dessert bananas, and Saba cultivars, used mainly for cooking, are called pisang in Malaysia and Indonesia, kluai in Thailand and chuoi in Vietnam.[40] Fe'i bananas, grown and eaten in the islands of the Pacific, are derived from entirely different wild species than traditional bananas and plantains. Most Fe'i bananas are cooked, but Karat bananas, which are short and squat with bright red skins, very different from the usual yellow dessert bananas, are eaten raw.[41]

In summary, in commerce in Europe and the Americas (although not in small-scale cultivation), it is possible to distinguish between "bananas", which are eaten raw, and "plantains", which are cooked. In other regions of the world, particularly India, Southeast Asia and the islands of the Pacific, there are many more kinds of banana and the two-fold distinction is not useful and not made in local languages. Plantains are one of many kinds of cooking bananas, which are not always distinct from dessert bananas.
Historical cultivation
Early cultivation
See also: Musa acuminata
Original native ranges of the ancestors of modern edible bananas. Musa acuminata is shown in green and Musa balbisiana in orange.[42]

Farmers in Southeast Asia and Papua New Guinea first domesticated bananas. Recent archaeological and palaeoenvironmental evidence at Kuk Swamp in the Western Highlands Province of Papua New Guinea suggests that banana cultivation there goes back to at least 5000 BCE, and possibly to 8000 BCE.[4][43] It is likely that other species were later and independently domesticated elsewhere in Southeast Asia. Southeast Asia is the region of primary diversity of the banana. Areas of secondary diversity are found in Africa, indicating a long history of banana cultivation in the region.[44]
Map stating that banana cultivation occurred in pre-Islamic times in India and Southeast Asia, during the 700–1500 CE "Islamic period" along the Nile River and in Mesopotamia and Palestine, and less-certainly in sub-Saharan Africa during that same period
Actual and probable diffusion of bananas during Islamic times (700–1500 CE)[45]

Phytolith discoveries in Cameroon dating to the first millennium BCE[46] triggered an as yet unresolved debate about the date of first cultivation in Africa. There is linguistic evidence that bananas were known in Madagascar around that time.[47] The earliest prior evidence indicates that cultivation dates to no earlier than late 6th century CE.[48] It is likely, however, that bananas were brought at least to Madagascar if not to the East African coast during the phase of Malagasy colonization of the island from South East Asia c. 400 CE.[49]

The banana may also have been present in isolated locations elsewhere in the Middle East on the eve of Islam. The spread of Islam was followed by far-reaching diffusion. There are numerous references to it in Islamic texts (such as poems and hadiths) beginning in the 9th century. By the 10th century the banana appears in texts from Palestine and Egypt. From there it diffused into North Africa and Muslim Iberia. During the medieval ages, bananas from Granada were considered among the best in the Arab world.[45] In 650, Islamic conquerors brought the banana to Palestine. Today, banana consumption increases significantly in Islamic countries during Ramadan, the month of daylight fasting.[50]

Bananas were certainly grown in the Christian Kingdom of Cyprus by the late medieval period. Writing in 1458, the Italian traveller and writer Gabriele Capodilista (it) wrote favourably of the extensive farm produce of the estates at Episkopi, near modern-day Limassol, including the region's banana plantations.[51]

Bananas were introduced to the Americas by Portuguese sailors who brought the fruits from West Africa in the 16th century.[52]

Many wild banana species as well as cultivars exist in extraordinary diversity in India, China, and Southeast Asia.

    There are fuzzy bananas whose skins are bubblegum pink; green-and-white striped bananas with pulp the color of orange sherbet; bananas that, when cooked, taste like strawberries. The Double Mahoi plant can produce two bunches at once. The Chinese name of the aromatic Go San Heong banana means 'You can smell it from the next mountain.' The fingers on one banana plant grow fused; another produces bunches of a thousand fingers, each only an inch long.
    — Mike Peed, The New Yorker[53]

Plantation cultivation in the Caribbean, Central and South America
Main article: History of modern banana plantations in the Americas
Photo of two cross-sectional halves of seed-filled fruit.
Fruits of wild-type bananas have numerous large, hard seeds.

In the 15th and 16th centuries, Portuguese colonists started banana plantations in the Atlantic Islands, Brazil, and western Africa.[54] North Americans began consuming bananas on a small scale at very high prices shortly after the Civil War, though it was only in the 1880s that the food became more widespread.[55] As late as the Victorian Era, bananas were not widely known in Europe, although they were available.[54] Jules Verne introduces bananas to his readers with detailed descriptions in Around the World in Eighty Days (1872).

The earliest modern plantations originated in Jamaica and the related Western Caribbean Zone, including most of Central America. It involved the combination of modern transportation networks of steamships and railroads with the development of refrigeration that allowed more time between harvesting and ripening. North American shippers like Lorenzo Dow Baker and Andrew Preston, the founders of the Boston Fruit Company started this process in the 1870s, but railroad builders like Minor C. Keith also participated, eventually culminating in the multi-national giant corporations like today's Chiquita Brands International and Dole.[55] These companies were monopolistic, vertically integrated (meaning they controlled growing, processing, shipping and marketing) and usually used political manipulation to build enclave economies (economies that were internally self-sufficient, virtually tax exempt, and export-oriented that contribute very little to the host economy). Their political maneuvers, which gave rise to the term Banana republic for states like Honduras and Guatemala, included working with local elites and their rivalries to influence politics or playing the international interests of the United States, especially during the Cold War, to keep the political climate favorable to their interests.[56]
Peasant cultivation for export in the Caribbean
Main article: History of peasant banana production in the Americas

The vast majority of the world's bananas today are cultivated for family consumption or for sale on local markets. India is the world leader in this sort of production, but many other Asian and African countries where climate and soil conditions allow cultivation also host large populations of banana growers who sell at least some of their crop.[57]

Peasant sector banana growers produce for the world market in the Caribbean, however. The Windward Islands are notable for the growing, largely of Cavendish bananas, for an international market, generally in Europe but also in North America. In the Caribbean, and especially in Dominica where this sort of cultivation is widespread, holdings are in the 1–2 acre range. In many cases the farmer earns additional money from other crops, from engaging in labor outside the farm, and from a share of the earnings of relatives living overseas. This style of cultivation often was popular in the islands as bananas required little labor input and brought welcome extra income.[citation needed] Banana crops are vulnerable to destruction by high winds, such as tropical storms or cyclones.[58]

After the signing of the NAFTA agreements in the 1990s, however, the tide turned against peasant producers. Their costs of production were relatively high and the end of favorable tariff and other supports, especially in the European Economic Community, made it difficult for peasant producers to compete with bananas grown on large plantations by the well-capitalized firms like Chiquita and Dole. Not only did the large companies have access to cheap labor in the areas they worked, but they were better able to afford modern agronomic advances such as fertilization. The "dollar banana" produced by these concerns made the profit margins for peasant bananas unsustainable.[citation needed]

Caribbean countries have sought to redress this problem by providing government supported agronomic services and helping to organize producers' cooperatives. They have also been supporters of the Fair Trade movement which seeks to balance the inequities in the world trade in commodities.[citation needed]
East Africa
Main article: East African Highland bananas

Most farms supply local consumption. Cooking bananas represent a major food source and a major income source for smallhold farmers. In east Africa, highland bananas are of greatest importance as a staple food crop. In countries such as Uganda, Burundi, and Rwanda per capita consumption has been estimated at 45 kilograms (99 lb) per year, the highest in the world.[citation needed]
Modern cultivation

All widely cultivated bananas today descend from the two wild bananas Musa acuminata and Musa balbisiana. While the original wild bananas contained large seeds, diploid or polyploid cultivars (some being hybrids) with tiny seeds are preferred for human raw fruit consumption.[59] These are propagated asexually from offshoots. The plant is allowed to produce two shoots at a time; a larger one for immediate fruiting and a smaller "sucker" or "follower" to produce fruit in 6–8 months. The life of a banana plantation is 25 years or longer, during which time the individual stools or planting sites may move slightly from their original positions as lateral rhizome formation dictates.[citation needed]

Cultivated bananas are parthenocarpic, i.e. the flesh of the fruit swells and ripens without its seeds being fertilized and developing. Lacking viable seeds, propagation typically involves farmers removing and transplanting part of the underground stem (called a corm). Usually this is done by carefully removing a sucker (a vertical shoot that develops from the base of the banana pseudostem) with some roots intact. However, small sympodial corms, representing not yet elongated suckers, are easier to transplant and can be left out of the ground for up to two weeks; they require minimal care and can be shipped in bulk.[citation needed]

It is not necessary to include the corm or root structure to propagate bananas; severed suckers without root material can be propagated in damp sand, although this takes somewhat longer.[citation needed]

In some countries, commercial propagation occurs by means of tissue culture. This method is preferred since it ensures disease-free planting material. When using vegetative parts such as suckers for propagation, there is a risk of transmitting diseases (especially the devastating Panama disease).[citation needed]

As a non-seasonal crop, bananas are available fresh year-round.[60]
Cavendish
Main article: Cavendish bananas
Grocery store photo of several bunches of bananas
Cavendish bananas are the main commercial banana cultivars sold in the world market.

In global commerce in 2009, by far the most important cultivars belonged to the triploid AAA group of Musa acuminata, commonly referred to as Cavendish group bananas. They accounted for the majority of banana exports,[59] despite only coming into existence in 1836.[61] The cultivars Dwarf Cavendish and Grand Nain (Chiquita Banana) gained popularity in the 1950s after the previous mass-produced cultivar, Gros Michel (also an AAA group cultivar), became commercially unviable due to Panama disease, caused by the fungus Fusarium oxysporum which attacks the roots of the banana plant.[59] Cavendish cultivars are resistant to the Panama Disease but in 2013 there were fears that the Black Sigatoka fungus would in turn make Cavendish bananas unviable.[62]

Ease of transport and shelf life rather than superior taste make the Dwarf Cavendish the main export banana.[citation needed]

Even though it is no longer viable for large scale cultivation, Gros Michel is not extinct and is still grown in areas where Panama disease is not found.[63] Likewise, Dwarf Cavendish and Grand Nain are in no danger of extinction, but they may leave supermarket shelves if disease makes it impossible to supply the global market. It is unclear if any existing cultivar can replace Cavendish bananas, so various hybridisation and genetic engineering programs are attempting to create a disease-resistant, mass-market banana.[59]
Ripening

Export bananas are picked green, and ripen in special rooms upon arrival in the destination country. These rooms are air-tight and filled with ethylene gas to induce ripening. The vivid yellow color consumers normally associate with supermarket bananas is, in fact, caused by the artificial ripening process.[64] Flavor and texture are also affected by ripening temperature. Bananas are refrigerated to between 13.5 and 15 °C (56.3 and 59.0 °F) during transport. At lower temperatures, ripening permanently stalls, and the bananas turn gray as cell walls break down. The skin of ripe bananas quickly blackens in the 4 °C (39 °F) environment of a domestic refrigerator, although the fruit inside remains unaffected.
Two adjacent photos of bananas. The left is in sunlight; the right is under ultraviolet light.
Ripened bananas (left, under sunlight) fluoresce in blue when exposed to UV light.

"Tree-ripened" Cavendish bananas have a greenish-yellow appearance which changes to a brownish-yellow as they ripen further. Although both flavor and texture of tree-ripened bananas is generally regarded as superior to any type of green-picked fruit,[citation needed] this reduces shelf life to only 7–10 days.[citation needed]

Bananas can be ordered by the retailer "ungassed" (i.e. not treated with ethylene), and may show up at the supermarket fully green. Guineos verdes (green bananas) that have not been gassed will never fully ripen before becoming rotten. Instead of fresh eating, these bananas can be used for cooking, as seen in Jamaican cuisine.[65]

A 2008 study reported that ripe bananas fluoresce when exposed to ultraviolet light. This property is attributed to the degradation of chlorophyll leading to the accumulation of a fluorescent product in the skin of the fruit. The chlorophyll breakdown product is stabilized by a propionate ester group. Banana-plant leaves also fluoresce in the same way. Green bananas do not fluoresce. The study suggested that this allows animals which can see light in the ultraviolet spectrum (tetrachromats and pentachromats) to more easily detect ripened bananas.[66]
Storage and transport

Bananas must be transported over long distances from the tropics to world markets.[67] To obtain maximum shelf life, harvest comes before the fruit is mature. The fruit requires careful handling, rapid transport to ports, cooling, and refrigerated shipping. The goal is to prevent the bananas from producing their natural ripening agent, ethylene. This technology allows storage and transport for 3–4 weeks at 13 °C (55 °F). On arrival, bananas are held at about 17 °C (63 °F) and treated with a low concentration of ethylene. After a few days, the fruit begins to ripen and is distributed for final sale. Unripe bananas can not be held in home refrigerators because they suffer from the cold.[citation needed] Ripe bananas can be held for a few days at home. If bananas are too green, they can be put in a brown paper bag with an apple or tomato overnight to speed up the ripening process.[68]

Carbon dioxide (which bananas produce) and ethylene absorbents extend fruit life even at high temperatures. This effect can be exploited by packing banana in a polyethylene bag and including an ethylene absorbent, e.g., potassium permanganate, on an inert carrier. The bag is then sealed with a band or string. This treatment has been shown to more than double lifespans up to 3–4 weeks without the need for refrigeration.[69][70][71]
Production and export
2016 Production
millions of tonnes Country 	Bananas 	Plantains 	Total
 India
	29.1 	  	29.1
 China
	13.1 	  	13.1
 Philippines
	5.8 	3.1 	8.9
 Ecuador
	6.5 	0.6 	7.1
 Indonesia
	7.0 	  	7.0
 Brazil
	6.8 	  	6.8
 Colombia
	2.0 	3.5 	5.5
 Cameroon
	1.2 	4.3 	5.5
 Uganda
	0.6 	3.7 	4.3
 Ghana
	0.09 	4.0 	4.1
 Guatemala
	3.8 	0.3 	4.1
World
	113.3 	35.1 	148.4
Source: FAOSTAT of the United Nations[72] Note: Some countries produce statistics distinguishing between bananas and plantain production, but four of the top six producers do not, requiring comparisons using the total for bananas and plantains combined.

In 2016, world production of bananas and plantains was 148 million tonnes, led by India and China with a combined total (only for bananas) of 28% of global production (table). Other major producers were the Philippines, Ecuador, Indonesia, and Brazil, together accounting for 20% of the world total of bananas and plantains (table).

As reported for 2013, total world exports were 20 million tonnes of bananas and 859,000 tonnes of plantains.[73] Ecuador and the Philippines were the leading exporters with 5.4 and 3.3 million tonnes, respectively, and the Dominican Republic was the leading exporter of plantains with 210,350 tonnes.[73]
Developing countries

Bananas and plantains constitute a major staple food crop for millions of people in developing countries.[67] In most tropical countries, green (unripe) bananas used for cooking represent the main cultivars. Most producers are small-scale farmers either for home consumption or local markets. Because bananas and plantains produce fruit year-round, they provide a valuable food source during the hunger season (when the food from one annual/semi-annual harvest has been consumed, and the next is still to come). Bananas and plantains are important for global food security.[74]
Pests, diseases, and natural disasters
Main article: List of banana and plantain diseases
Photo of bananas in blue plastic bag
Banana bunches are sometimes encased in plastic bags for protection. The bags may be coated with pesticides.

While in no danger of outright extinction, the most common edible banana cultivar Cavendish (extremely popular in Europe and the Americas) could become unviable for large-scale cultivation in the next 10–20 years. Its predecessor 'Gros Michel', discovered in the 1820s, suffered this fate. Like almost all bananas, Cavendish lacks genetic diversity, which makes it vulnerable to diseases, threatening both commercial cultivation and small-scale subsistence farming.[75][76] Some commentators remarked that those variants which could replace what much of the world considers a "typical banana" are so different that most people would not consider them the same fruit, and blame the decline of the banana on monogenetic cultivation driven by short-term commercial motives.[56]
Panama disease

Panama disease is caused by a fusarium soil fungus (Race 1), which enters the plants through the roots and travels with water into the trunk and leaves, producing gels and gums that cut off the flow of water and nutrients, causing the plant to wilt, and exposing the rest of the plant to lethal amounts of sunlight. Prior to 1960, almost all commercial banana production centered on "Gros Michel", which was highly susceptible.[77] Cavendish was chosen as the replacement for Gros Michel because, among resistant cultivars, it produces the highest quality fruit. However, more care is required for shipping the Cavendish, and its quality compared to Gros Michel is debated.[by whom?][citation needed]

According to current sources, a deadly form of Panama disease is infecting Cavendish. All plants are genetically identical, which prevents evolution of disease resistance. Researchers are examining hundreds of wild varieties for resistance.[77]
Tropical race 4

Tropical race 4 (TR4), a reinvigorated strain of Panama disease, was first discovered in 1993. This virulent form of fusarium wilt has wiped out Cavendish in several southeast Asian countries. It has yet to reach the Americas; however, the soil-based fungi can easily be carried on boots, clothing, or tools. This is how TR4 travels and will be its most likely route into Latin America. Cavendish is highly susceptible to TR4, and over time Cavendish will almost certainly be eliminated from commercial production by this disease. The only known defense to TR4 is genetic resistance, which remains undiscovered as of 2018.[78]
Black sigatoka

Black sigatoka is a fungal leaf spot disease first observed in Fiji in 1963 or 1964. Black Sigatoka (also known as black leaf streak) has spread to banana plantations throughout the tropics from infected banana leaves that were used as packing material. It affects all main cultivars of bananas and plantains (including the Cavendish cultivars[62]), impeding photosynthesis by blackening parts of the leaves, eventually killing the entire leaf. Starved for energy, fruit production falls by 50% or more, and the bananas that do grow ripen prematurely, making them unsuitable for export. The fungus has shown ever-increasing resistance to treatment, with the current expense for treating 1 hectare (2.5 acres) exceeding $1,000 per year. In addition to the expense, there is the question of how long intensive spraying can be environmentally justified. Several resistant cultivars of banana have been developed, but none has yet received commercial acceptance due to taste and texture issues.[citation needed]
In East Africa

With the arrival of black sigatoka, banana production in eastern Africa fell by over 40%. For example, during the 1970s, Uganda produced 15 to 20 tonnes (15 to 20 long tons; 17 to 22 short tons) of bananas per hectare. Today, production has fallen to only 6 tonnes (5.9 long tons; 6.6 short tons) per hectare.[citation needed]

The situation has started to improve as new disease-resistant cultivars have been developed by the International Institute of Tropical Agriculture and the National Agricultural Research Organisation of Uganda (NARO), such as FHIA-17 (known in Uganda as the Kabana 3). These new cultivars taste different from the Cabana banana, which has slowed their acceptance by local farmers. However, by adding mulch and manure to the soil around the base of the plant, these new cultivars have substantially increased yields in the areas where they have been tried.[citation needed]

The International Institute of Tropical Agriculture and NARO, funded by the Rockefeller Foundation and CGIAR have started trials for genetically modified bananas that are resistant to both Black sigatoka and banana weevils. It is developing cultivars specifically for smallholder and subsistence farmers.[citation needed]
Banana bunchy top virus

Banana bunchy top virus (BBTV) jumps from plant to plant using aphids. It stunts leaves, resulting in a "bunched" appearance. Generally, an infected plant does not produce fruit, although mild strains exist which allow some production. These mild strains are often mistaken for malnourishment, or a disease other than BBTV. There is no cure; however, its effect can be minimized by planting only tissue-cultured plants (in vitro propagation), controlling aphids, and immediately removing and destroying infected plants.[citation needed]
Banana bacterial wilt

Banana bacterial wilt (BBW) is a bacterial disease caused by Xanthomonas campestris pv. musacearum.[79] After being originally identified on a close relative of bananas, Ensete ventricosum, in Ethiopia in the 1960s,[80] BBW occurred in Uganda in 2001 affecting all banana cultivars. Since then BBW has been diagnosed in Central and East Africa including the banana growing regions of Rwanda, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Tanzania, Kenya, Burundi, and Uganda.[81]
Nutrition
Bananas, raw (Daily Value) Nutritional value per 100 g (3.5 oz)
Energy 	371 kJ (89 kcal)
Carbohydrates
	
22.84 g
Sugars 	12.23 g
Dietary fiber 	2.6 g
Fat
	
0.33 g
Protein
	
1.09 g
Vitamins
Thiamine (B1) 	
(3%)
0.031 mg
Riboflavin (B2) 	
(6%)
0.073 mg
Niacin (B3) 	
(4%)
0.665 mg
Pantothenic acid (B5) 	
(7%)
0.334 mg
Vitamin B6 	
(31%)
0.4 mg
Folate (B9) 	
(5%)
20 μg
Choline 	
(2%)
9.8 mg
Vitamin C 	
(10%)
8.7 mg
Minerals
Iron 	
(2%)
0.26 mg
Magnesium 	
(8%)
27 mg
Manganese 	
(13%)
0.27 mg
Phosphorus 	
(3%)
22 mg
Potassium 	
(8%)
358 mg
Sodium 	
(0%)
1 mg
Zinc 	
(2%)
0.15 mg
Other constituents
Water 	74.91 g
Link to USDA Database entry values are for edible portion

    Units
    μg = micrograms • mg = milligrams
    IU = International units

Percentages are roughly approximated using US recommendations for adults.
Source: USDA Nutrient Database

Raw bananas (not including the peel) are 75% water, 23% carbohydrates, 1% protein, and contain negligible fat (table). In a 100 gram amount, bananas supply 89 Calories and are a rich source of vitamin B6, providing 31% of the US recommended Daily Value, and contain moderate amounts of vitamin C, manganese and dietary fiber (table).

Although bananas are commonly thought to supply exceptional potassium content,[82] their actual potassium content is relatively low per typical food serving at only 8% of the US recommended Daily Value (table). Vegetables with higher potassium content than raw dessert bananas (358 mg per 100 grams) include raw spinach (558 mg per 100 grams), baked potatoes without skin (391 mg per 100 grams), cooked soybeans (539 mg per 100 grams), grilled portabella mushrooms (437 mg per 100 grams) and processed tomato sauces (413–439 mg per 100 grams). Raw plantains contain 499 mg potassium per 100 grams. Dehydrated dessert bananas or banana powder contain 1491 mg potassium per 100 grams.[83]

Individuals with a latex allergy may experience a reaction to bananas.[84]
Culture
Food and cooking
See also: Cooking plantain and List of banana dishes
Fruit

Bananas are a staple starch for many tropical populations. Depending upon cultivar and ripeness, the flesh can vary in taste from starchy to sweet, and texture from firm to mushy. Both the skin and inner part can be eaten raw or cooked. The primary component of the aroma of fresh bananas is isoamyl acetate (also known as banana oil), which, along with several other compounds such as butyl acetate and isobutyl acetate, is a significant contributor to banana flavor.[85][86][87]

During the ripening process, bananas produce the gas ethylene, which acts as a plant hormone and indirectly affects the flavor. Among other things, ethylene stimulates the formation of amylase, an enzyme that breaks down starch into sugar, influencing the taste of bananas. The greener, less ripe bananas contain higher levels of starch and, consequently, have a "starchier" taste. On the other hand, yellow bananas taste sweeter due to higher sugar concentrations. Furthermore, ethylene signals the production of pectinase, an enzyme which breaks down the pectin between the cells of the banana, causing the banana to soften as it ripens.[88][89]

Bananas are eaten deep fried, baked in their skin in a split bamboo, or steamed in glutinous rice wrapped in a banana leaf. Bananas can be made into jam. Banana pancakes are popular amongst backpackers and other travelers in South Asia and Southeast Asia. This has elicited the expression Banana Pancake Trail for those places in Asia that cater to this group of travelers. Banana chips are a snack produced from sliced dehydrated or fried banana or plantain, which have a dark brown color and an intense banana taste. Dried bananas are also ground to make banana flour. Extracting juice is difficult, because when a banana is compressed, it simply turns to pulp. Bananas feature prominently in Philippine cuisine, being part of traditional dishes and desserts like maruya, turón, and halo-halo or saba con yelo. Most of these dishes use the Saba or Cardaba banana cultivar. Bananas are also commonly used in cuisine in the South-Indian state of Kerala, where they are steamed (puzhungiyathu), made into curries,[90] fried into chips, (upperi)[91] or fried in batter (pazhampori).[92] Pisang goreng, bananas fried with batter similar to the Filipino maruya or Kerala pazhampori, is a popular dessert in Malaysia, Singapore, and Indonesia. A similar dish is known in the United Kingdom and United States as banana fritters.

Plantains are used in various stews and curries or cooked, baked or mashed in much the same way as potatoes, such as the pazham pachadi dish prepared in Kerala.[90]

Seeded bananas (Musa balbisiana), one of the forerunners of the common domesticated banana,[93] are sold in markets in Indonesia.[citation needed]
Flower

Banana hearts are used as a vegetable[94] in South Asian and Southeast Asian cuisine, either raw or steamed with dips or cooked in soups, curries and fried foods.[95] The flavor resembles that of artichoke. As with artichokes, both the fleshy part of the bracts and the heart are edible.[96]
Leaves
Main article: Banana leaf

Banana leaves are large, flexible, and waterproof. They are often used as ecologically friendly disposable food containers or as "plates" in South Asia and several Southeast Asian countries. In Indonesian cuisine, banana leaf is employed in cooking method called pepes and botok; the banana leaf packages containing food ingredients and spices are cooked on steam, in boiled water or grilled on charcoal. In the South Indian states of Tamil Nadu, Karnataka, Andhra Pradesh and Kerala in every occasion the food must be served in a banana leaf and as a part of the food a banana is served. Steamed with dishes they impart a subtle sweet flavor. They often serve as a wrapping for grilling food. The leaves contain the juices, protect food from burning and add a subtle flavor.[97] In Tamil Nadu (India) leaves are fully dried and used as packing material for food stuffs and also making cups to hold liquid foods. In Central American countries, banana leaves are often used as wrappers for tamales.[citation needed]
Trunk

The tender core of the banana plant's trunk is also used in South Asian and Southeast Asian cuisine, and notably in the Burmese dish mohinga.
Fiber
Textiles

Banana fiber harvested from the pseudostems and leaves of the plant has been used for textiles in Asia since at least the 13th century. Both fruit-bearing and fibrous varieties of the banana plant have been used.[98] In the Japanese system Kijōka-bashōfu, leaves and shoots are cut from the plant periodically to ensure softness. Harvested shoots are first boiled in lye to prepare fibers for yarn-making. These banana shoots produce fibers of varying degrees of softness, yielding yarns and textiles with differing qualities for specific uses. For example, the outermost fibers of the shoots are the coarsest, and are suitable for tablecloths, while the softest innermost fibers are desirable for kimono and kamishimo. This traditional Japanese cloth-making process requires many steps, all performed by hand.[99]

In a Nepalese system the trunk is harvested instead, and small pieces are subjected to a softening process, mechanical fiber extraction, bleaching and drying. After that, the fibers are sent to the Kathmandu Valley for use in rugs with a silk-like texture. These banana fiber rugs are woven by traditional Nepalese hand-knotting methods, and are sold RugMark certified.[citation needed]

In South Indian state of Tamil Nadu after harvesting for fruit the trunk (outer layer of the shoot) is made into fine thread used in making of flower garlands instead of thread.[citation needed]

In India, a banana fiber separator machine has been developed, which takes the agricultural waste of local banana harvests and extracts strands of the fiber.[100]
Paper
Main article: Banana paper

Banana fiber is used in the production of banana paper. Banana paper is made from two different parts: the bark of the banana plant, mainly used for artistic purposes, or from the fibers of the stem and non-usable fruits. The paper is either hand-made or by industrial process.[101]
Cultural roles
Coconut, banana and banana leaves used while worshiping River Kaveri at Tiruchirappalli, India.
Banana flowers and leaves for sale in the Thanin market in Chiang Mai, Thailand.
Arts

    The song "Yes! We Have No Bananas" was written by Frank Silver and Irving Cohn and originally released in 1923; for many decades, it was the best-selling sheet music in history. Since then the song has been rerecorded several times and has been particularly popular during banana shortages.[102][103]
    A person slipping on a banana peel has been a staple of physical comedy for generations. An American comedy recording from 1910 features a popular character of the time, "Uncle Josh", claiming to describe his own such incident:[104]

        Now I don't think much of the man that throws a banana peelin' on the sidewalk, and I don't think much of the banana peel that throws a man on the sidewalk neither ... my foot hit the bananer peelin' and I went up in the air, and I come down ker-plunk, jist as I was pickin' myself up a little boy come runnin' across the street ... he says, "Oh mister, won't you please do that agin? My little brother didn't see you do it."

    The poet Bashō is named after the Japanese word for a banana plant. The "bashō" planted in his garden by a grateful student became a source of inspiration to his poetry, as well as a symbol of his life and home.[105]
    The cover artwork for the debut album of The Velvet Underground features a banana made by Andy Warhol. On the original vinyl LP version, the design allowed the listener to "peel" this banana to find a pink, peeled phallic banana on the inside.[106]

Religion and popular beliefs
Nang Tani, the female ghost of Thai folklore that haunts banana plants

In Burma, bunches of green bananas surrounding a green coconut in a tray form an important part of traditional offerings to the Buddha and the Nats.[citation needed]

In all the important festivals and occasions of Hindus, the serving of bananas plays a prominent part. Traditionally in Tamil marriages, banana plants are tied on both sides of the entrance of houses to bless the newlyweds to be useful to each other.[citation needed] The banana is one of three fruits with this significance, the others being mango and jack fruit.[citation needed]

In Thailand, it is believed that a certain type of banana plants may be inhabited by a spirit, Nang Tani, a type of ghost related to trees and similar plants that manifests itself as a young woman.[107] Often people tie a length of colored satin cloth around the pseudostem of the banana plants.[108]

In Malay folklore, the ghost known as Pontianak is associated with banana plants (pokok pisang), and its spirit is said to reside in them during the day.[109]
Racist symbol

There is a long racist history of describing people of African descent as being more like monkeys than humans, and due to the assumption in popular culture that monkeys like bananas, bananas have been used in symbolic acts of hate speech.[110][111] In April 2014, during a match at Villarreal's stadium, El Madrigal, Dani Alves was targeted by Villareal supporter David Campaya Lleo, who threw a banana at him.[112] Alves picked up the banana, peeled it and took a bite, and the meme went viral on social media in support of him.[113] Racist taunts are an ongoing problem in football.[114][115] Bananas were hung from nooses around the campus of American University in May 2017 after the student body elected its first black woman student government president.[116]
Unicode

The Unicode standard includes the emoji character U+1F34C 🍌 BANANA (HTML &#127820;).[117]
Other uses

    The large leaves may be used as umbrellas.[97]
    Banana peel may have capability to extract heavy metal contamination from river water, similar to other purification materials.[118][119] In 2007, banana peel powder was tested as a means of filtration for heavy metals and radionuclides occurring in water produced by the nuclear and fertilizer industries (cadmium contaminant is present in phosphates). When added and thoroughly mixed for 40 minutes, the powder can remove roughly 65% of heavy metals, and this can be repeated.
    Waste bananas can be used to feed livestock.[120]

Gallery

    Peeled, whole, and longitudinal section

    A bunch of Cavendish bananas

    Kilawin na pusô ng saging, a Filipino dish using banana flowers

    Nicaraguan Nacatamales, in banana leaves, ready to be steamed

    Kaeng yuak is a northern Thai curry made with the core of the banana plant

    Pisang goreng fried banana coated in batter, popular snack in Indonesia

    Banana in sweet gravy, known as pengat pisang in Malaysia.

    Banana 'tree' showing fruit and inflorescence.

    Banana inflorescence, partially opened

    Wild banana with flowers and stem growing in reverse direction seen in Réunion

    Female flowers have petals and other flower parts at the tip of the ovary

    Wild banana with flowers and stem growing in reverse direction seen in Kodagu, India

References

"Banana from 'Fruits of Warm Climates' by Julia Morton". Hort.purdue.edu. Archived from the original on 2009-04-15. Retrieved 2009-04-16.
Armstrong, Wayne P. "Identification Of Major Fruit Types". Wayne's Word: An On-Line Textbook of Natural History. Archived from the original on November 20, 2011. Retrieved 2013-08-17.
"Banana". Merriam-Webster Online Dictionary. Retrieved 2013-01-04.
"Tracing antiquity of banana cultivation in Papua New Guinea". The Australia & Pacific Science Foundation. Archived from the original on 2007-08-29. Retrieved 2007-09-18.
Nelson, Ploetz & Kepler 2006.
"Where bananas are grown". ProMusa. 2013. Retrieved 24 October 2016.
Picq, Claudine & INIBAP, eds. (2000). Bananas (PDF) (English ed.). Montpellier: International Network for the Improvement of Banana and Plantains/International Plant Genetic Resources Institute. ISBN 978-2-910810-37-5. Retrieved 2013-01-31.
Stover & Simmonds 1987, pp. 5–9.
Stover & Simmonds 1987, p. 212.
Stover & Simmonds 1987, pp. 13–17.
Nelson, Ploetz & Kepler 2006, p. 26.
Ploetz et al. 2007, p. 12.
"Banana Plant Growing Info". Greenearth. Retrieved 2008-12-20.
Stover & Simmonds 1987, pp. 9–13.
Angolo, A. (May 15, 2008). "Banana plant with five hearts is instant hit in Negros Occ". ABS-CBN Broadcasting Corporation. Retrieved 2008-05-17.
Stover & Simmonds 1987, pp. 244–247.
Office of the Gene Technology Regulator 2008.
Smith, James P. (1977). Vascular Plant Families. Eureka, Calif.: Mad River Press. ISBN 978-0-916422-07-3.
Warkentin, Jon (2004). "How to make a Banana Split" (Microsoft Word). University of Manitoba. Retrieved 2014-07-21.
Simmonds, N.W. (1962). "Where our bananas come from". New Scientist. Reed Business Information. 16 (307): 36–39. ISSN 0262-4079. Retrieved 2011-06-11.
Brodsky, Allen B (1978). CRC Handbook on Radiation Measurement and Protection. 1. West Palm Beach, FL: CRC Press. p. 620 Table A.3.7.12. ISBN 978-0-8493-3756-7.
Cass, Stephen & Wu, Corinna (June 4, 2007). "Everything Emits Radiation—Even You: The millirems pour in from bananas, bomb tests, the air, bedmates..." Discover: Science, Technology, and the Future. Retrieved 2011-09-05.
"banana dose « Physical Insights". Enochthered.wordpress.com. July 25, 2007. Retrieved 2011-10-02.
"Banana". Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved 2010-08-05.
Search for "Musa", "World Checklist of Selected Plant Families". Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew. Retrieved 2013-01-06.
Hyam, R. & Pankhurst, R.J. (1995). Plants and their names : a concise dictionary. Oxford: Oxford University Press. p. 329. ISBN 978-0-19-866189-4.
Bailey, Liberty Hyde (1916). The Standard Cyclopedia of Horticulture. Macmillan. pp. 2076–2079.
Valmayor et al. 2000.
Constantine, D.R. "Musa paradisiaca". Archived from the original on 2008-09-05. Retrieved 2014-09-05.
Porcher, Michel H. (July 19, 2002). "Sorting Musa names". The University of Melbourne. Retrieved 2011-01-11.
"Musa paradisiaca". World Checklist of Selected Plant Families. Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew. Retrieved 2013-01-06.
d’Hont, A. L.; Denoeud, F.; Aury, J. M.; Baurens, F. C.; Carreel, F. O.; Garsmeur, O.; Noel, B.; Bocs, S. P.; Droc, G. T.; Rouard, M.; Da Silva, C.; Jabbari, K.; Cardi, C. L.; Poulain, J.; Souquet, M. N.; Labadie, K.; Jourda, C.; Lengellé, J.; Rodier-Goud, M.; Alberti, A.; Bernard, M.; Correa, M.; Ayyampalayam, S.; McKain, M. R.; Leebens-Mack, J.; Burgess, D.; Freeling, M.; Mbéguié-a-Mbéguié, D.; Chabannes, M. & Wicker, T. (2012). "The banana (Musa acuminata) genome and the evolution of monocotyledonous plants". Nature. 488 (7410): 213–217. doi:10.1038/nature11241. PMID 22801500.
"Our plantains: What is a plantain?". Chiquita. Retrieved 2013-02-02.
Valmayor et al. 2000, p. 2.
Ploetz et al. 2007, pp. 18–19.
Office of the Gene Technology Regulator 2008, p. 1.
Stover & Simmonds (1987, p. 183). "The Horn and French group of plantain cultivars (AAB) are preferred for cooking purposes over ABB cooking bananas ... As a result the AAB plantains fetch a higher price than the ABB cooking bananas."
Qi, Baoxiu; Moore, Keith G. & Orchard, John (2000). "Effect of Cooking on Banana and Plantain Texture". Journal of Agricultural and Food Chemistry. 48 (9): 4221–4226. doi:10.1021/jf991301z. PMID 10995341.
Gibert, Olivier; Dufour, Dominique; Giraldo, Andrés; Sánchez, Teresa; Reynes, Max; Pain, Jean-Pierre; González, Alonso; Fernández, Alejandro & Díaz, Alberto (2009). "Differentiation between Cooking Bananas and Dessert Bananas. 1. Morphological and Compositional Characterization of Cultivated Colombian Musaceae (Musa sp.) in Relation to Consumer Preferences". Journal of Agricultural and Food Chemistry. 57 (17): 7857–7869. doi:10.1021/jf901788x. PMID 19691321.
Valmayor et al. 2000, pp. 8–12.
Englberger, Lois (2003). "Carotenoid-rich bananas in Micronesia" (PDF). InfoMusa. 12 (2): 2–5. Retrieved 2013-01-22.
de Langhe, Edmond & de Maret, Pierre (2004). "Tracking the banana: its significance in early agriculture". In Hather, Jon G. The Prehistory of Food: Appetites for Change. Routledge. p. 372. ISBN 978-0-203-20338-5.
Denham, T.P.; Haberle, S.G.; Lentfer, C.; Fullagar, R.; Field, J.; Therin, M.; Porch, N. & Winsborough, B. (2003). "Origins of Agriculture at Kuk Swamp in the Highlands of New Guinea". Science. 301 (5630): 189–193. doi:10.1126/science.1085255. PMID 12817084.
Ploetz et al. 2007, p. 7.
Watson, Andrew (1983). Agricultural innovation in the early Islamic world. New York: Cambridge University Press. p. 54. ISBN 978-0-521-24711-5.
Mbida, V.M.; Van Neer, W.; Doutrelepont, H. & Vrydaghs, L. (2000). "Evidence for banana cultivation and animal husbandry during the first millennium BCE in the forest of southern Cameroon" (PDF). Journal of Archeological Science. 27 (2): 151–162. doi:10.1006/jasc.1999.0447.
Zeller, Friedrich J. (2005). "Herkunft, Diversität und Züchtung der Banane und kultivierter Zitrusarten (Origin, diversity and breeding of banana and cultivated citrus)" (PDF). Journal of Agriculture and Rural Development in the Tropics and Subtropics, Supplement 81 (in German). Retrieved 2014-09-05.
Lejju, B. Julius; Robertshaw, Peter & Taylor, David (2005). "Africa's earliest bananas?" (PDF). Journal of Archeological Science. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2007-12-02.
Randrianja, Solofo & Ellis, Stephen (2009). Madagascar: A Short History. University of Chicago Press. ISBN 978-1-85065-947-1.
Haroon, Jasim Uddin (September 10, 2008). "Banana consumption on rise during Ramadan". The Financial Express. Retrieved 2014-09-05.
Jennings, Ronald (1992). Christians and Muslims in Ottoman Cyprus and the Mediterranean World, 1571–1640. New York: NYU Press. p. 189. ISBN 978-0-8147-4181-8.
Gibson, Arthur C. "Bananas and plantains". UCLA. Archived from the original on November 10, 2012. Retrieved September 5, 2014.
Peed, Mike (January 10, 2011). "We Have No Bananas: Can Scientists Defeat a Devastating Blight?". The New Yorker. pp. 28–34. Retrieved 2011-01-13.
"Phora Ltd. – History of Banana". Phora-sotoby.com. Archived from the original on 2009-04-16. Retrieved 2009-04-16.
Koeppel, Dan (2008). Banana: The Fate of the Fruit that Changed the World. New York: Hudson Street Press. pp. 51–53. ISBN 978-0-452-29008-2.
"Big-business greed killing the banana – Independent". The New Zealand Herald. May 24, 2008. p. A19.
Office of the Gene Technology Regulator 2008, pp. 7–8.
Stover & Simmonds 1987, pp. 206–207.
Castle, Matt (August 24, 2009). "The Unfortunate Sex Life of the Banana". DamnInteresting.com.
"How bananas are grown". Banana Link. Retrieved 2 September 2016.
"Banana History – The history of bananas as food". Homecooking.about.com. May 5, 2011. Retrieved 2011-10-02.
Holmes, Bob (April 20, 2013). "Go Bananas". New Scientist. 218 (2913): 9–41. (Also at Holmes, Bob (April 20, 2013). "Nana from heaven? How our favourite fruit came to be". New Scientist. Retrieved 2013-04-19. (Subscription required (help)).)
"Are bananas about to become extinct?". Retrieved 2012-12-13.
Ding, Phebe; Ahmad, S.H.; Razak, A.R.A.; Shaari, N. & Mohamed, M.T.M. (2007). "Plastid ultrastructure, chlorophyll contents, and colour expression during ripening of Cavendish banana (Musa acuminata 'Williams') at 17°C and 27°C" (PDF). New Zealand Journal of Crop and Horticultural Science. 35 (2): 201–210. doi:10.1080/01140670709510186. Retrieved 2011-07-16.
Kirschner, Chanie (January 21, 2016). "4 ways to use green bananas that won't ripen". Mother Nature Network. Retrieved April 30, 2017.
Moser, Simone; Müller, Thomas; Ebert, Marc-Olivier; Jockusch, Steffen; Turro, Nicholas J. & Kräutler, Bernhard (2008). "Blue luminescence of ripening bananas" (PDF). Angewandte Chemie International Edition. 47 (46): 8954–8957. doi:10.1002/anie.200803189. PMC 2912500 Freely accessible. PMID 18850621. Retrieved 2014-05-16.
FAO), Pedro Arias (Asesor da (2003). The World Banana Economy, 1985-2002. Food & Agriculture Org. ISBN 9789251050576.
"How to Ripen Bananas". Chiquita. Retrieved 2009-08-15.
Scott, K.J.; McGlasson, W.B. & Roberts, E.A. (1970). "Potassium Permanganate as an Ethylene Absorbent in Polyethylene Bags to Delay the Ripening of Bananas During Storage". Australian Journal of Experimental Agriculture and Animal Husbandry. 10 (43): 237. doi:10.1071/EA9700237.
Scott, K.J.; Blake, J.R.; Stracha, G.; Tugwell, B.L. & McGlasson, W.B. (1971). "Transport of Bananas at Ambient Temperatures using Polyethylene Bags". Tropical Agriculture (Trinidad). 48: 163–165.
Scott, K.J. & Gandanegara, S. (1974). "Effect of Temperature on the Storage Life of bananas Held in Polyethylene Bags with an Ethylene Absorbent". Tropical Agriculture (Trinidad). 51: 23–26.
"Banana and plantain production in 2016, Crops/Regions/World list/Production Quantity (pick lists)". UN Food and Agriculture Organization, Corporate Statistical Database (FAOSTAT). 2017. Retrieved 6 January 2018.
"Banana and plantain exports in 2013, Crops and livestock products/Regions/World list/Export quantity (pick lists)". UN Food and Agriculture Organization, Corporate Statistical Database (FAOSTAT). 2017. Retrieved 6 January 2018.
d'Hont, A; Denoeud, F; Aury, J. M; Baurens, F. C; Carreel, F; Garsmeur, O; Noel, B; Bocs, S; Droc, G; Rouard, M; Da Silva, C; Jabbari, K; Cardi, C; Poulain, J; Souquet, M; Labadie, K; Jourda, C; Lengellé, J; Rodier-Goud, M; Alberti, A; Bernard, M; Correa, M; Ayyampalayam, S; McKain, M. R; Leebens-Mack, J; Burgess, D; Freeling, M; Mbéguié-a-Mbéguié, D; Chabannes, M; et al. (2012). "The banana (Musa acuminata) genome and the evolution of monocotyledonous plants". Nature. 488 (7410): 213–7. doi:10.1038/nature11241. PMID 22801500.
"A future with no bananas?". New Scientist. May 13, 2006. Retrieved 2006-12-09.
Montpellier, Emile Frison (February 8, 2003). "Rescuing the banana". New Scientist. Retrieved 2006-12-09.
Barker, C.L. (November 2008). "Conservation: Peeling Away". National Geographic Magazine.
"Risk assessment of Eastern African Highland Bananas and Plantains against TR4" (PDF). International Banana Symposium. 2012. Archived from the original (PDF) on April 7, 2014. Retrieved April 6, 2014.
Tushemereirwe, W.; Kangire, A.; Ssekiwoko, F.; Offord, L.C.; Crozier, J.; Boa, E.; Rutherford, M. & Smith, J.J. (2004). "First report of Xanthomonas campestris pv. musacearum on banana in Uganda". Plant Pathology. 53 (6): 802. doi:10.1111/j.1365-3059.2004.01090.x.
Bradbury, J.F. & Yiguro, D. (1968). "Bacterial wilt of Enset (Ensete ventricosa) incited by Xanthomonas musacearum". Phytopathology. 58: 111–112.
Mwangi, M.; Bandyopadhyay, R.; Ragama, P. & Tushemereirwe, R.K. (2007). "Assessment of banana planting practices and cultivar tolerance in relation to management of soilborne Xanthomonas campestris pv. musacearum". Crop Protection. 26 (8): 1203–1208. doi:10.1016/j.cropro.2006.10.017.
Kraft S (4 August 2011). "Bananas! Eating Healthy Will Cost You; Potassium Alone $380 Per Year". Medical News Today. Retrieved 25 October 2014.
"Ranking of potassium content per 100 grams in common fruits and vegetables". United States Department of Agriculture, National Nutrient Database for Standard Reference, Release 28. November 2016. Retrieved 6 May 2017.
Taylor, J.S. & Erkek, E. (2004). "Latex allergy: diagnosis and management". Dermatologic Therapy. 17 (4): 289–301. doi:10.1111/j.1396-0296.2004.04024.x. PMID 15327474.
Fahlbusch, Karl-Georg; Hammerschmidt, Franz-Josef; Panten, Johannes; Pickenhagen, Wilhelm; Schatkowski, Dietmar; Bauer, Kurt; Garbe, Dorothea & Surburg, Horst (2000). "Flavors and Fragrances". Ullmann's Encyclopedia of Industrial Chemistry. 15. Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA. p. 82. doi:10.1002/14356007.a11_141. ISBN 978-3-527-30673-2.
Mui, Winnie W. Y.; Durance, Timothy D. & Scaman, Christine H. (2002). "Flavor and Texture of Banana Chips Dried by Combinations of Hot Air, Vacuum, and Microwave Processing". Journal of Agricultural and Food Chemistry. 50 (7): 1883–1889. doi:10.1021/jf011218n. "Isoamyl acetate (9.6%) imparts the characteristic aroma typical of fresh bananas (13, 17−20), while butyl acetate (8.1%) and isobutyl acetate (1.4%) are considered to be character impact compounds of banana flavor."
Salmon, B.; Martin, G. J.; Remaud, G. & Fourel, F. (November–December 1996). "Compositional and Isotopic Studies of Fruit Flavours. Part I. The Banana Aroma". Flavour and Fragrance Journal. 11 (6): 353–359. doi:10.1002/(SICI)1099-1026(199611)11:6<353::AID-FFJ596>3.0.CO;2-9.
"Fruit Ripening". Retrieved 2010-02-17.
"Ethylene Process". Archived from the original on 2010-03-24. Retrieved 2010-02-17.
Manmadhan, Prema (February 28, 2011). "Pazham Pachadi". The Hindu. Chennai, India. Retrieved 2014-01-03.
Pereira, Ignatius (April 13, 2013). "The taste of Kerala". The Hindu. Chennai, India. Retrieved 2014-01-03.
Manmadhan, Prema (February 28, 2011). "A snack & a snare". The Hindu. Chennai, India. Retrieved 2014-01-03.
Plant Breeding Abstracts. Commonwealth Agricultural Bureaux. 1949. p. 162.
Solomon, C (1998). Encyclopedia of Asian Food (Periplus ed.). Australia: New Holland Publishers. ISBN 0-85561-688-1. Archived from the original on June 3, 2008. Retrieved 2008-05-17.
Fried banana flowers. Duda Online (December 14, 2009). Retrieved on 2011-10-02.
Molly Watson. "Banana Flowers". About.com. Retrieved 2014-05-13. See also the link on that page for Banana Flower Salad.
"Banana". Hortpurdue.edu. Archived from the original on April 15, 2009. Retrieved 2009-04-16.
Hendrickx, Katrien. The Origins of Banana-fibre Cloth in the Ryukyus, Japan. Leuven University Press. p. 188. ISBN 9789058676146.
"Traditional Crafts of Japan – Kijoka Banana Fiber Cloth". Association for the Promotion of Traditional Craft Industries. Archived from the original on November 4, 2006. Retrieved December 11, 2006.
"An Entrepreneur Story – Turning Waste from Banana Harvests into Silk Fiber for the Textile Industry". InfoDev. 5 January 2009.
Gupta, K. M. (2014-11-13). Engineering Materials: Research, Applications and Advances. CRC Press. ISBN 9781482257984.
Shaw A (1987). ""Yes! We have No Bananas"/"Charleston" (1923)". The Jazz Age: Popular Music in 1920s. Oxford University Press. p. 132. ISBN 9780195060829.
Dan Koeppel (2005). "Can This Fruit Be Saved?". Popular Science. Bonnier Corporation. 267 (2): 60–70.
Stewart, Cal. "Collected Works of Cal Stewart part 2". Uncle Josh in a Department Store (1910). The Internet Archive. Retrieved 2010-11-17.
Matsuo Basho: the Master Haiku Poet, Kodansha Europe, ISBN 0-87011-553-7
Bill DeMain (December 11, 2011). "The Stories Behind 11 Classic Album Covers". mental_floss. Archived from the original on October 28, 2012. Retrieved January 6, 2013.
"Banana Tree Prai Lady Ghost". Thailand-amulets.net. 2012-03-19. Retrieved 2012-08-26.
"Spirits". Thaiworldview.com. Retrieved 2012-08-26.
"Pontianak- South East Asian Vampire". Castleofspirits.com. Retrieved 2014-05-13.
Hund, Wulf D.; Mills, Charles W (29 February 2016). "Comparing Black People to Monkeys has a Long, Dark Simian History". Huffington Post.
"In the Fight Against Racism, No Bananas, No Monkeys, Please!". RioOnWatch. 6 May 2014.
"Dani Alves: Joven que lanzó un plátano a Dani Alves quedó en libertad con cargos". La Prensa, Peru. 30 April 2014. Retrieved 9 March 2015.
"Dani Alves: Barcelona defender eats banana after it lands on pitch". BBC Sport. 28 April 2014. Retrieved 29 April 2014.
Evans, Richard (August 22, 2016). "Throwing bananas at black sportsmen has been recognised as racism across Europe for decades".
McGowan, Tom (May 5, 2014). "Bananas and monkey chants: Is racism endemic in Spanish football? - CNN". CNN.
Fortin, Jacey (3 May 2017). "F.B.I. Helping American University Investigate Bananas Found Hanging From Nooses". The New York Times.
"Miscellaneous Symbols and Pictographs" (PDF). Retrieved 2015-04-28.
Minard, Anne (March 11, 2011). "Is That a Banana in Your Water?". National Geographic. Archived from the original on April 26, 2011. Retrieved 2011-03-15.
Castro, Renata S. D.; Caetano, LaéRcio; Ferreira, Guilherme; Padilha, Pedro M.; Saeki, Margarida J.; Zara, Luiz F.; Martines, Marco Antonio U. & Castro, Gustavo R. (2011). "Banana Peel Applied to the Solid Phase Extraction of Copper and Lead from River Water: Preconcentration of Metal Ions with a Fruit Waste". Industrial & Engineering Chemistry Research. 50 (6): 3446–3451. doi:10.1021/ie101499e.

    Heuzé V., Tran G., Archimède H., Renaudeau D., Lessire M., 2016. Banana fruits. Feedipedia, a programme by INRA, CIRAD, AFZ and FAO. https://www.feedipedia.org/node/683 Last updated on March 25, 2016, 10:36

Bibliography

    Nelson, S.C.; Ploetz, R.C. & Kepler, A.K. (2006). "Musa species (bananas and plantains)". In Elevitch, C.R. Species Profiles for Pacific Island Agroforestry (PDF). Hōlualoa, Hawai'i: Permanent Agriculture Resources (PAR). Retrieved 2013-01-10.
    Office of the Gene Technology Regulator (2008). The Biology of Musa L. (banana) (PDF). Australian Government. Retrieved 2013-01-30.
    Ploetz, R.C.; Kepler, A.K.; Daniells, J. & Nelson, S.C. (2007). "Banana and Plantain: An Overview with Emphasis on Pacific Island Cultivars". In Elevitch, C.R. Species Profiles for Pacific Island Agroforestry (PDF). Hōlualoa, Hawai'i: Permanent Agriculture Resources (PAR). Retrieved 2013-01-10.
    Stover, R.H. & Simmonds, N.W. (1987). Bananas (3rd ed.). Harlow, England: Longman. ISBN 978-0-582-46357-8.
    Valmayor, Ramón V.; Jamaluddin, S.H.; Silayoi, B.; Kusumo, S.; Danh, L.D.; Pascua, O.C. & Espino, R.R.C. (2000). Banana cultivar names and synonyms in Southeast Asia (PDF). Los Baños, Philippines: International Network for Improvement of Banana and Plantain – Asia and the Pacific Office. ISBN 978-971-91751-2-4. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2013-01-08. Retrieved 2013-01-08.

Further reading

    Harriet Lamb, "Fighting The Banana Wars and other Fairtrade Battles", ISBN 978-1-84604-083-2

External links

    Kew plant profile: Musa acuminata (banana)
    Articles on banana trade at Agritrade

[show]

    v t e 

Lists of countries by agricultural output rankings
[show]

    v t e 

Bananas and plantains
[show]

    v t e 

Banana cultivars
[show]

    v t e 

Yunnan cuisine
Authority control 	

    GND: 4204383-9 NDL: 00560501 

Categories:

    BananasFiber plantsStaple foodsTropical agricultureTropical fruit

Navigation menu

    Not logged in
    Talk
    Contributions
    Create account
    Log in

    Article
    Talk

    Read
    View source
    View history

Search

    Main page
    Contents
    Featured content
    Current events
    Random article
    Donate to Wikipedia
    Wikipedia store

Interaction

    Help
    About Wikipedia
    Community portal
    Recent changes
    Contact page

Tools

    What links here
    Related changes
    Upload file
    Special pages
    Permanent link
    Page information
    Wikidata item
    Cite this page

Print/export

    Create a book
    Download as PDF
    Printable version

In other projects

    Wikimedia Commons

Languages

    Diné bizaad
    Español
    Français
    한국어
    Italiano
    Русский
    Tagalog
    Tiếng Việt
    中文

Edit links

    This page was last edited on 27 February 2018, at 17:55.
    Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.

    Privacy policy
    About Wikipedia
    Disclaimers
    Contact Wikipedia
    Developers
    Cookie statement
    Mobile view
    Enable previews

    Wikimedia Foundation	
    Powered by MediaWiki
	
MG 42
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
  (Redirected from Mg42)
MG 42
MG42-1.jpg
An MG 42
Type 	General-purpose machine gun
Place of origin 	Nazi Germany
Service history
In service 	1942–present
Used by 	See Users
Wars 	World War II
Portuguese Colonial War[1]
Lebanese Civil War
Yugoslav Wars[2][3]
Syrian Civil War[4]
Yemeni Civil War (2015-present)[5]
Saudi-led intervention in Yemen (2015-present)
Conflict in Najran, Jizan and Asir
Production history
Designer 	Werner Gruner
Designed 	1942
Manufacturer 	

Mauser Werke AG
Wilhelm-Gustloff-Stiftung
Steyr-Daimler-Puch,
Großfuß AG, MAGET (Maschinenbau und Gerätebau GmbH, Berlin-Tegel)
Produced 	1942–1945 (Nazi Germany)
No. built 	423,600[6]
Variants 	MG 45/MG 42V, MG 1, MG 2, Rheinmetall MG 3, M53, MG 74
Specifications
Weight 	11.57 kg (25.51 lb)
Length 	1,220 mm (48 in)
Barrel length 	533 mm (21.0 in)
Cartridge 	7.92×57mm Mauser
Action 	Recoil-operated, roller-locked
Rate of fire 	1,200 rounds/min (varied between 900–1,500 rounds/min with different bolts)
Practical: 153 rounds/min[7]
Muzzle velocity 	740 m/s (2,428 ft/s) (s.S. Patrone)
Effective firing range 	200–2,000 m (219–2,187 yd) sight adjustments
3,500 m (3,828 yd) with tripod and telescopic sight
Maximum firing range 	4,700 m (5,140 yd)
Feed system 	50 or 250-round non-disintegrating metallic-link belt
50-round belt drum
Sights 	Iron sights, antiaircraft sight or telescopic sights

The MG 42 (shortened from German: Maschinengewehr 42, or "machine gun 42") is a 7.92×57mm Mauser general purpose machine gun designed in Nazi Germany and used extensively by the Wehrmacht and the Waffen-SS during the second half of World War II. It was intended to replace the earlier MG 34, which was more expensive and took much longer to produce, but both weapons were produced until the end of the war.

Designed to be low-cost and easy to build, the MG 42 proved to be highly reliable and easy to operate. It is most notable for its very high cyclic rate for a gun using full power service cartridges, averaging about 1,200 rounds per minute compared to around 850 for the MG 34, and perhaps 450 to 600 for other common machine guns like the M1919 Browning or Bren. This rate of fire made it extremely effective in providing suppressive fire, and its unique sound led to it being nicknamed "Hitler's buzzsaw".[8]

The MG 42 was adopted by several armed organizations after the war, and was both copied and built under licence. The MG 42's lineage continued past Nazi Germany's defeat, forming the basis for the nearly identical MG1 (MG 42/59), chambered in 7.62×51mm NATO, which subsequently evolved into the MG1A3, and later the Bundeswehr's MG 3. It also spawned the Yugoslav nearly identical Zastava M53, Swiss MG 51 and SIG MG 710-3, Austrian MG 74, and the Spanish 5.56×45mm NATO Ameli light machine gun, and lent many design elements to the American M60 and Belgian MAG.

Contents

    1 History
        1.1 Prior to World War I
        1.2 1930s
        1.3 Development of the MG 42
        1.4 Adoption of the MG 42
        1.5 MG 42 nicknames
        1.6 Rate of fire
    2 German small arms doctrine
        2.1 Medium machine gun fire support role
        2.2 Allied army small arms doctrines
    3 Operation
        3.1 Effective rates of fire
    4 Design details
        4.1 Lafette 42 tripod
    5 Variants and developments
        5.1 MG 45
        5.2 T24 machine gun
        5.3 MG 51
        5.4 M53
        5.5 MG 3
        5.6 MG 74
        5.7 SIG MG710
    6 Users
    7 See also
    8 References
    9 Bibliography
    10 External links

History
Prior to World War I

Even prior to World War I, the German military was already looking forward to replacing the heavy machine guns which proved to be such a success in that war. The MG13 was one of the first developments toward a goal of producing a weapon that could perform multiple roles, rather than just one. The MG13 was the result of reengineering the Dreyse Water cooled machine gun to fit the new requirement.[8] The twin barreled Gast gun was developed with the goal of providing a high rate of fire weapon for anti-aircraft use which was reported to have reached cyclic rates of fire as high as 1,600 rounds per minute.[8]
1930s
Wehrmacht reenactors with a MG 34 general-purpose machine gun mounted on a Lafette 34 tripod

This eventually led to the Einheitsmaschinengewehr (Universal machine gun) introducing an entirely new concept in automatic firepower. By changing its mount, sights and feed mechanism, the operator could radically transform an Einheitsmaschinengewehr for several purposes.

The MG 34 is considered to be the first modern general-purpose machine gun or Einheitsmaschinengewehr. It was developed to use the standard German 7.92×57mm Mauser full-power rifle round.[8] It was envisaged and well developed to provide portable light and medium machine gun infantry cover, anti-aircraft coverage, and even sniping ability. Equipped with a quick-change barrel and fed either with non-disintegrating metallic-link belts, or from a 50-round Gurttrommel (belt drum) or a 75-round spring-loaded saddle-drum Patronentrommel 34 magazines (with a simple change of the feed cover for a Trommelhalter magazine holder), the MG 34 could sustain fire for much longer periods of time than other portable squad-level weapons such as the American B.A.R. and the British Bren Gun, both of which were fed by box magazines, while also being much lighter and more portable than crew-served weapons like the Browning M1919 or Vickers machine guns (which also lacked quick-change barrels). The MG 34 was also quite versatile; not only was it able to be fed from belted ammunition or a saddle drum magazine, it could also be fired from a bipod, an innovative Lafette 34 tripod or various pintle mounts for armored vehicles. Switching between a bipod and a tripod required no special tools, as the mounting latch was spring-loaded. As the MG 34 Panzerlauf, it was used throughout the war as secondary armament on panzers and other vehicles. One attempt at improvement was the MG 34S, an incremental improvement on the basic 34 design. The MG 34S could cope with a cyclic fire rate of 1,200 rounds per minute. Later in the war, the MG 34 was used as the basis for the Luftwaffe's MG 81 flexible defensive gun. However, the MG 34 did have its drawbacks, such as sensitivity to dirt, mud and comparatively complex and expensive production.[9]
Development of the MG 42
A German Waffen SS soldier involved in heavy fighting in and around the French town of Caen in mid-1944. He is carrying an MG 42 configured as a light support weapon with a folding bipod and detachable 50-round belt drum container.

In order to address these issues, a contest was held for a true MG 34 replacement. Three companies were asked to submit designs: Metall und Lackierwarenfabrik Johannes Großfuß AG of Döbeln, Rheinmetall-Borsig of Sömmerda, and Stübgen of Erfurt.[10] Of the number of proposals submitted, Großfuß AG's proved to be the best design by far, employing a unique recoil-operated roller locking mechanism whereas the two competing designs used a gas-actuated system.[10] Interestingly, the company had no earlier experience in weapons manufacture, specializing in pressed and stamped steel components (the company's staple product was sheet metal lanterns). Dr.-Ing. Werner Gruner, one of the leading design engineers with Großfuß, knew nothing about machine guns when he was given the task of being involved with the project, although he specialized in the technology of mass production. Gruner would attend an army machine gunner's course to familiarize himself with the utility and characteristics of such a weapon, also seeking input from soldiers. He then recycled an existing Mauser-developed operating system and incorporated features from his experiences with army machine gunners and lessons learned during the early stages of the war.[10] Being made largely out of stamped metal, the new design required considerably less machining, high grade steel alloys and was much simpler to build than other machine guns—it took 75 man hours to complete the new gun as opposed to 150 man hours for the MG 34 (a 50% reduction), and cost 250 RM as opposed to 327 RM (a 24% reduction).

The resulting MG 39 remained similar to the earlier MG 34 overall, a deliberate decision made to maintain familiarity. The only major changes from the gunner's perspective were dropping of the drum-magazine feed option, leaving the weapon to fire belted ammunition, or from a single 50-round drum-shaped Gurttrommel belt container fitted to the gun's receiver, and simplifying the weapon's open sights for aiming purposes. All these changes were intended to increase, maintain, or accommodate the gun's high practical rate of fire. Although made of relatively inexpensive and simple parts, the prototypes also proved to be considerably more rugged and resistant to jamming than the precisely machined and somewhat temperamental MG 34. A limited run of about 1,500 of its immediate predecessor, the MG 39/41, was completed in 1941 and tested in combat trials.
Adoption of the MG 42

The weapon was officially accepted, and the main manufacturing of the production design began in 1942, as the MG 42, contracts going to Großfuß, Mauser-Werke, Gustloff-Werke and others. Production during the war amounted to over 400,000 units (17,915 units in 1942, 116,725 in 1943, 211,806 in 1944, and 61,877 in 1945).[6]
MG 42 nicknames

The distinctive sound caused by the high cyclic firing rate gave rise to the nickname "Hitler's buzzsaw" and the German soldiers' Hitlersäge, Singende Säge, Knochensäge or elektrisches MG ("Hitler's saw", "Singing saw", "Bone saw" or "electric machine gun"). The gun (like the MG 34) was sometimes called "Spandau" by British troops, a traditional generic term for all German machine guns, left over from the famous Allied nickname for the MG 08 Maxim-derivative used by German forces during World War I and derived from its manufacturer's plates noting the city where some were produced.[11][12]
Rate of fire
System-search.svg
	
This section's factual accuracy is disputed. Relevant discussion may be found on Talk:MG 42. Please help to ensure that disputed statements are reliably sourced. (April 2017) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)

The maximum cyclic rate of the mechanisms of both the MG34 and MG42 are often exaggerated and inaccurate. Both guns were designed for multiple purposes. The high rate of fire was for anti-aircraft use. The normal rate of fire was far lower than is often stated. The effective rate of fire was much higher than that of the guns used by the Allies, but this was due more to the cooling rate of its six interchangeable barrels, than to the design otherwise.[7] Confusion over this undoubtedly comes from the Gast Gun (1,600rpm) and the MG81 aircraft gun (1,400-1,600rpm). The MG34 and MG42 both were equipped with bolts of different damping rates to control fire rates. In infantry use the rate of fire was likely to have been lower than 950 rpm. The very light buffer has been reported to have achieved 1,200 rpm in these guns, but may in fact reflect confusion over the MG81 and Gast gun rates.[13]
German small arms doctrine

While the Americans had standardized a semi-automatic rifle in 1936 (the M1 Garand), the German military kept issuing Karabiner 98k bolt-action rifles due to their tactical doctrine of basing a squad's firepower on the general-purpose machine gun in the light machine gun role so that the role of the rifleman was largely to carry ammunition and provide covering fire for the machine gunners. The advantage of the general purpose machine gun concept was that it added greatly to the overall volume of fire that could be put out by a squad-sized unit.[14][15] The German military did experiment with semi-automatic rifles throughout World War II and fielded the Gewehr 41 series of which less than 150,000 were built, the Gewehr 43/Karabiner 43 series of which 402,713 were built, and introduced the first assault rifle in 1943 – the MP43 / MP44 / StG 44 series, of which 425,977 were built. Due to the relatively limited production of semi-automatic and assault rifles, the Karabiner 98k of which over 14,600,000 were built remained the primary service weapon until the last days of World War II, and was manufactured until the surrender in May 1945.
Medium machine gun fire support role
The MG 42 mounted on the Lafette 42 tripod

In the German heavy machine gun (HMG) platoons, each platoon served four MG 34/MG 42 machine guns, used in the sustained fire mode mounted on tripods.[16] In 1944 this was altered to six machine guns in three sections with two seven-man heavy machine gun squads per section as follows:

    Squad leader (NCO) MP40
    Machine gunner (private) MG 34/MG 42 and pistol
    Assistant gunner (private) pistol
    Three riflemen (privates) rifles
    Horse leader for horse, cart and trailer (private) rifle

Allied army small arms doctrines

The Allied army doctrines of the era centered on the rifleman, with the machine gun serving a support role, and they utilised weapons with cyclic rates of fire of typically 450–600 rounds per minute. The Allied nations had machine guns with similar rates of fire, but mounted them almost exclusively in aircraft, where the fleeting opportunities for firing made such high rates necessary. The only similar Allied weapon was the Vickers K aircraft gun, and that was used by ground forces only in specialized circumstances. German doctrine was the reverse, with the machine gun placed in a central role and rifleman employed in support. This meant that German forces deployed far more machine guns per equivalent-sized unit than the Allies,[citation needed] and that Allied troops assaulting a German position almost invariably faced the firepower of the MG 42. It was possible for operating crews to lay down a non-stop barrage of fire, ceasing only when the barrel had to be replaced. This allowed the MG 42 to tie up significantly larger numbers of enemy troops. Both the Americans and the British trained their troops to take cover from the fire of an MG 42, and assault the position during the small time window of barrel replacement, which took around 4 to 7 seconds (estimated).
Operation
Motorcycle with sidecar mounted MG 42

One of the weapon's most notable features was in its exceptionally high cyclic rate of fire of about 1,200 to 1,500 rounds per minute, twice the rate of the Vickers and Browning machine guns, which fired at a rate of about 600 rounds per minute. The ear could not easily discern the sound of individual shots being fired, instead hearing a sound described as like "ripping cloth" or a buzzsaw.

The German military instructed sustained fire must be avoided at all costs. They ruled that the results of sustained fire are disappointing and that the expenditure of ammunition involved is "intolerable."[7] In the bipod mounted light machine gun role the MG 42 users were trained to fire short bursts of 3 to 7 rounds and strive to optimize their aim between bursts fired in succession.[7] For its medium machine gun role the MG 42 was matched to the newly developed Lafette 42 tripod. In the tripod mounted medium machine gun role MG 42 users were trained to fire short bursts and bursts of 20 to 50 rounds and strive to optimize their aim between bursts fired in succession.[7]

The optimum operating crew of an MG 42 in its medium machine gun role was six men: the gun commander, the No.1 who carried and fired the gun, the No.2 who carried the tripod, and Nos. 3, 4, and 5 who carried ammunition, spare barrels, entrenching tools, and other items. For additional protection the commander, No.1 and No.2 were armed with pistols, while the remaining three carried rifles. This large team was often reduced to just three: the gunner, the loader (also barrel carrier), and the spotter. The gunner of the weapon was preferably a junior non-commissioned officer (or Unteroffizier).

The high cyclic rate of fire of the MG 42 sometimes proved a liability mainly in that, while the weapon could be used to devastating effect, it could quickly exhaust its ammunition supply. For this reason, it was not uncommon for all soldiers operating near an MG 42 to carry extra ammunition, thus providing the MG 42 with a backup source when its main supply was exhausted. Another disadvantage of the MG 42 was that the high cyclic rate of fire led to the barrel overheating quickly. After around 150 rounds of continuous fire, the gun operator would open a side hatch (leading to the barrel) and replace the overheated barrel with a new one. The machine gun crew member responsible for a hot barrel change was issued protective asbestos gloves to prevent getting burned.
Effective rates of fire
Tripod mounted MG 42 setup for its anti-aircraft role provides air cover during a rest pause

The cyclic rate reflects how fast a self-loading firearm can fire, extract, reload, and recock its mechanism to prepare for follow-up shots. This is not, however, the effective rate of fire. The effective rate of fire is the rate at which shots can be accurately (effectively) fired at a specific point target. Many firearms have been developed with high rates of fire which have proven to have extremely low rates of effective fire. An easy example of this is the MAC-10 [17] submachine gun. The MAC-10 in 9×19mm Parabellum originally fired at 1,200 rounds per minute. At this rate individual shots can no longer be heard so its fire sounds like a giant zipper being ripped apart. When a MAC-10 fires, the probability of hitting a target with more than 1 or 2 rounds is quite low. So it has a very poor effective rate of fire.

The effective rate of fire of the MG 34 is listed at 150 rounds per minute while the MG42 achieves a slightly higher 154 rounds per minute.[7] No air-cooled machine gun can fire sustained for very long before overheating and malfunctioning. The effective rates of fire of the MG 34/42 were higher than allied weapons, but the cyclic firing rate is not a huge factor in this, the ability to change barrels is. The cyclic rate of the MG 42 can be altered by installing different bolts and recoil springs A heavier bolt uses more recoil energy to overcome inertia, thus slowing the action. It must be noted that those heavy bolts also were used along with stiffer return springs. The standard MG 42 bolt weight for a normal rate of fire is 550 g (19.40 oz).[18] One of the roles of the MG 34 and MG 42 was to provide low level anti-aircraft coverage. A high cyclic firing rate is advantageous for use against targets that are exposed to a general-purpose machine gun for a limited time span, like aircraft. For targets that can be fired on by a general-purpose machine gun for longer periods than just a few seconds the cyclic firing rate becomes less important.

For a relevant current example, the FN MAG/M240 general-purpose machine gun series used by many (NATO) militaries cyclic rate is listed as 650 to 1,000 rounds per minute. But its effective rate of fire is approximately 100 rounds per minute.[19]
Design details
MG 42 roller-locked system
MG3 in 7.62mm NATO

The MG 42 is a 7.92×57mm Mauser, air-cooled, belt fed, open bolt, recoil-operated machine gun with a quick change barrel.

The MG 42 weighed 11.57 kg in the light machine gun role with the bipod, lighter than the MG 34 and easily portable. The bipod, the same one used on the MG 34, could be mounted to the front or the center of the gun depending on how and where it was being used.

The roller-locked bolt assembly consists of a bolt head, two rollers, a striker sleeve, bolt body, and a large return spring, which is responsible for pushing the bolt assembly into battery (the locked position) and returning it there when it is unlocked and pushed backwards by the recoil of firing or by the charging handle. As the striker sleeve is movable back and forth within the bolt assembly, the return spring is also responsible for pushing the striker sleeve forward during locking (described below). The bolt assembly locks with the barrel's breech (the end the cartridge is loaded into) via a prong type barrel extension behind the breech. As it is recoil-operated and fired from an open bolt, the weapon must be manually charged with the side-mounted charging handle.

The roller-locked recoil operation functions as follows: two cylindrical rollers, positioned in tracks on the bolt head, are pushed outwards into matching tracks in the barrel extension by the striker sleeve and lock the bolt in place against the breech. Upon firing, rearward force from the recoil of the cartridge ignition pushes the striker assembly back and allows the rollers to move inwards, back to their previous position, unlocking the bolt head and allowing the bolt assembly to recoil, extracting the spent cartridge and ejecting it down. The return spring then pushes the bolt assembly forwards again, pushing a new cartridge out of the belt into the breech, and the sequence repeats as long as the trigger is depressed. The MG 42 is only capable of fully automatic fire. Single shots are difficult, even for experienced operators, due to the weapon's rate of fire. The usual training objective is to be able to fire a burst of no more than three rounds. The weapon features a recoil booster at the muzzle to increase rearwards force due to recoil, therefore improving functional reliability and rate of fire.

The shoulder stock is designed to permit gripping with the left hand to hold it secure against the shoulder.

The open-type iron sighting line consists of a "∧-type" height adjustable front sight on a folding post and a leaf rear sight with an open V-notch sliding on a ramp, graduated from 200 to 2,000 meters (219 to 2,187 yd) in 100 meters (109 yd) increments. An auxiliary anti-aircraft "spider web" ring sight is kept in the maintenance kit, that can be fitting on the barrel jacket to be used in conjunction with a folding anti-aircraft rear peep sight that is attached by a hinge to the rear sight element base.

The barrel of the MG 42 could be quickly changed by the machine gun crew and weighed 1.8 kg (4.0 lb). The barrels could have traditional rifling or polygonal rifling. Polygonal rifling was an outgrowth of a cold-hammer forging process developed by German engineers prior to World War II. The process addressed the need to produce more durable machine gun barrels in less time than those produced with traditional methods.[20] Later produced barrel bores featured hard-chrome plating to make them more durable. The different versions made that the service life of an MG 42 barrel varied between 3,500 and 8,000 rounds. The method of barrel change made the MG 42 unsuitable for secondary or co-axial armament on World War II era German tanks with the exception of the Jagdpanzer IV. Early versions of the Jagdpanzer IV carried two standard (no modification made) MG 42s on both sides of the gun mantlet/glacis, firing through a ball slot which was protected by an armored cover (with the MG 42 retracted) when not in use. Later version Jagdpanzer IVs carried only one MG 42 on the left side.

The MG 42 incorporated lessons hard-won on the Eastern Front. Both the cocking handle and the catch for the top cover to the working parts were designed so that the gunner could operate them wearing arctic mittens or with a stick or rod. This was vital for winter conditions where contact by bare flesh on cold metal could cause severe injury, such as instant frostbite. The MG 42 also functioned well in other climates; dust and dirt in North Africa and Italy was less likely to jam the MG 42 than the more temperamental MG 34.
Lafette 42 tripod
A German paratrooper MG 42 mounted on a Lafette 42 tripod with MG Z 40 telescopic sight attached

For the medium machine gun role a large tripod, the Lafette 42, was available that included a number of features, such as recoil absorbing buffer springs, MG Z 34 or MG Z 40 periscope-type telescopic sight containing special sighting equipment for indirect fire, or the late World War II MG Z 44, designed for direct fire only. An accessory to lengthen these sights' periscope was available to use these sights behind cover. It could be set up in a prone, kneeling or high position. The Lafette 42 weighed 20.5 kg (45.2 lb) on its own and was a simplified version of the Lafette 34 used for the MG 34, as the MG 42 could be operated more easily from a Lafette and featured no semi-automatic firing mode. The legs could be extended with a Lafetteaufsatzstück to allow it to be used in the anti-aircraft role, and when lowered, it could be placed to allow the gun to be fired "remotely" while it swept an arc in front of the mounting with fire. Mounted to the Lafette and aimed through the telescopic sight, the effective range of the MG 42 could be extended out to 3,500 m (3,828 yd) when fired indirectly. The Lafette 42 tripod also had a bolt box to store a (spare) bolt and return spring.[21]

Another unique feature of German World War II machine guns was the Tiefenfeuerautomat feature on the Lafette 42 tripod. If selected, this feature mechanically controlled the rise and fall of the gun, elevating the gun for five rounds and then depressing it for four rounds. It lengthened the beaten zone by walking the fire in wave like motions up and down the range in a predefined area. The length of the beaten zone could be set on the Tiefenfeuerautomat. For example, being unsure whether the real distance was 2,000 or 2,300 m (2,187 or 2,515 yd), the gunner could make the mount do an automatic sweep between the elevations for 1,900 to 2,400 m (2,078 to 2,625 yd) and back. This sweeping of a selected beaten zone continued as long as the gun fired.[22]
Variants and developments
Various configurations of MG 42, including an anti-aircraft tripod (right)
MG 45

In 1944, the material shortages of the Third Reich led to the development of a newer version, the MG 45 (or MG 42V), which had a different operation mechanism that used roller-delayed blowback as opposed to roller locking. For this reason, the MG 45 is considered a different type of firearm, as the mechanisms of these two guns are different. It used steel of lesser quality, which reduced weight to 9 kg, while retaining the horizontal cocking handle. First tests were undertaken in June 1944, but development dragged on and eventually only ten were built. The tested MG 45/42V fired 120,000 rounds in succession at a rate of fire around 1,350 rounds per minute.
	
This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (February 2017) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)

The MG 42V had some influence in the post-war development of roller-delayed blowback system, as employed in modern Heckler & Koch small arms. The SIG MG 710-3 machine gun was based on the design of the MG 45 using a slight modification of the roller delayed action. Its rate of fire is stated to be 900 rounds per minute (the same as the heavy bolt MG 42) and definitely feasible, unlike the claim above, which is not credible, of a sustained 1350 rpm. This is a cyclic rate, not an effective rate of fire. The sustained rate of fire is determined by cooling, not action speed.[23]
T24 machine gun

The American military copied the MG 42 during the war as a possible replacement for the Browning Automatic Rifle and M1919A4 for infantry squads, the new version being chambered in the .30-06 cartridge. Saginaw Steering Gear constructed a working prototype designated as the T24 machine gun. It could also be used on an M2 Tripod.[24] The gun was made as an exact copy of the MG 42 which was chambered in 7.92×57mm Mauser Caliber. The only change was to use a barrel chambered in .30-06. The 7.92×57mm was 300-foot-pounds more powerful with a larger bullet, so the suggestion that Saginaw Steering gear abandoned the project because .30-06 is more powerful is untrue.[citation needed] The 7.92×57mm is ballistically superior.[25]

When the prototype was fired at Aberdeen Proving Ground, it fired only one shot and failed to eject the cartridge. A second attempt had the same result. The engineers had made no adjustment to the design to accommodate the longer .30-06 cartridge.[26] The US Army wanted to be able to manufacture this gun because it was so much cheaper to make than current guns. However, this never took place. German weapons designers adopted a philosophy during World War II of making guns which could be more efficiently manufactured. The MG 42 was a prime example.

When US soldiers first saw the gun it was ridiculed for its use of stamped steel parts, until it was realized how much quicker and more cheaply guns of this type could be manufactured.
MG 51
Main article: MG 51
Swiss built W+F Bern MG 51

The Swiss MG 51 or 7.5 mm Maschinengewehr 1951 was based on the design of the MG 42 chambered for 7.5×55mm Swiss GP 11. The final design, which appeared in 1950, was in most respects still similar to the MG 42, although many components were produced by machining instead of stamping, which increased the weight, the stability and the production costs of the machine gun. To prevent short shots Waffenfabrik Bern changed the locking system from roller to flapper locking. The resulting weapon had a cyclic rate of fire of 1,000 rounds per minute, was in the light machine gun role 4.4 kg (9.70 lb) heavier than the German MG 42, and much more finely made and finished.
M53
Yugoslavian built Zastava M53, a near exact copy of the MG 42. Note that the example in the photo is missing the trigger group.

In Yugoslavia this MG 42 variant was built at the state-owned Zavodi Crvena Zastava company as the M53 machine gun using original German machinery, retaining the 7.92×57mm Mauser caliber.[27] By doing so, the Yugoslavs retained the original weapon's design features, making the M53 a near exact copy of the German MG 42. The only major differences are a slower rate of fire and no anti-aircraft sight mount.[28] The aiming range of the M53 is 2,000 m (2,187 yd), and the terminal range of the bullet is 5,000 m (5,468 yd), the same as the MG 42. MG 42s captured in Yugoslavia at the end of World War II were put into reserve of Yugoslav People's Army as M53/42s. The last military use of M53s in Yugoslavia was in 1999. Some quantities of M53s were exported to Iraq in the 1980s and saw extensive action during both Gulf wars.[29] There is evidence that some M53s are still being used by Peshmerga forces in northern Iraq in the ongoing war against ISIS.[30] M53 was known under the nickname Шарац (Šarac).[31]
MG 3
Main article: Rheinmetall MG 3
Markings on an original MG 42 retrofitted to a MG 3 in 1959

The MG3 (originally the MG 1) is the MG 42 design rechambered to 7.62×51mm NATO. It is the primary general-purpose machine gun of the modern German armed forces (Bundeswehr).[32] A number of other (NATO) armies around the world have adopted the MG3, and it remains in widespread service today. Its belt-feed mechanism was copied and used in the design of the M60 machine gun.[33] The trigger mechanism of the FN MAG or MAG-58 is a virtual copy of the MG 42's and the MAG-58's belt-feed is also very similar.

The MG 3 and its preceding variants all share a high level of parts interchangeability with the original MG 42. Like the MG 42, the MG3 cyclic rates of fire can be altered by exchanging the standard weight (about 650 g (22.93 oz)) bolt used for the standard 1,100-1,200 rounds per minute rate of fire for an extra weight (about 900 g (31.75 oz)) bolt for a reduced 800-950 rounds per minute rate of fire. It must be noted that those bolts also are used along with different recoil springs.[34][35]
MG 74
The MG 74 of the Austrian Federal Army, is a modification of the MG 42

The final variant to date is the MG 74, developed by Austria and since 1974 it is the standard machine gun of the Austrian Armed Forces.

After its founding in 1955, the Austrian army was equipped with old guns temporarily out of U.S. stocks. Starting in 1959 these Browning M1919 were largely replaced by the MG 42 with modified barrel and bolt for the new 7.62×51mm NATO. But to introduce a modern weapon of its own production the Office of Defence Technology, in cooperation with Steyr Mannlicher and Beretta developed a gun specifically for the Austrian Army. The German MG 42/59 that was introduced in 1959 with the Bundeswehr to replace the U.S. machine guns, served as the basis, which was similar to the Austrian 7.62 mm MG 42. Targets were to reduce, among other things, the cyclic rate of fire and weight and have more versatile sights and mount. The development of the weapon was completed in 1974. It replaced from this year the MG 42 as the MG 74 of the Austrian Federal Army.

The modifications to the basic MG 42 design include an extremely heavy bolt (950 g (33.51 oz) vs. the 675 g (23.81 oz) MG 3 bolt) which reduces the cyclic rate of fire to around 850 rounds per minute. Rate of fire can be varied, if necessary, by changing the bolt and recoil spring. In addition, a select fire trigger group was added to allow semi-automatic fire (single shot) compared to the traditional fully automatic only fire capability of the original MG 42 design. The MG 74 also has a modern polymer stock and handgrips to save weight. Usually colored a dark green, adjustable rear sight (35° horizontal, vertical 15°) and additional anti-aircraft sight can be mounted optional.
SIG MG710
Main article: SIG MG 710-3
Sig MG 710-3

The Swiss SIG MG 710-3 machine gun was based on the design of the MG42V/MG45 using a slight modification of the roller-delayed action and chambered for 7.62×51mm NATO. Its cyclic rate of fire is 900 rounds per minute. The first version looks very much like the MG42.[36]
Users

     Austria[37]
     Djibouti[38]
     Independent State of Croatia
     Iraq[39][40]
     Iran[41]
     Libya[42]
     Nazi Germany
     Nigeria[43]
     Portugal[44]
     Syria[45][46][47]
     Ukraine[48][49][50]
     Vietnam[51]
     West Germany[52]
     Yugoslavia - Produced as M53.[53]

See also

    FG 42
    MG 34
    MG 51
    CETME Ameli, Spanish GPMG
    Rheinmetall MG 3, modern successor of the MG 42
    ShKAS machine gun, Soviet aircraft ordnance, only Allied machine gun that could fire faster than the MG 42
    SIG MG 710-3, Swiss GPMG derived from the MG 42
    Vickers K machine gun
    Bren light machine gun British regular infantry carried GPMG
    M1918 Browning Automatic Rifle US regular infantry carried GPMG

References

Afonso, Aniceto and Gomes, Carlos de Matos, Guerra Colonial (2000), pp. 183-184, ISBN 972-46-1192-2
Army of the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina#Equipment
"gates of hell bosnia - Bing video". Bing.com. Retrieved 2016-12-08.
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Tjpjn0DvT4o
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_beWFtnhl98
Folke Myrvang (2003), MG34-MG42: German Universal Machineguns. Collector Grade Publications
""German Views on Use of the MG 42" from Intelligence Bulletin, May 1944". lonesentry.com. Retrieved 17 February 2017. "Under battle conditions the MG 42 can fire about 22 bursts per minute—that is, about 154 rounds. Under the same conditions, the MG 34 is capable only of about 15 bursts per minute, at a rate of 7 to 10 rounds per burst, totalling about 150 rounds. Thus the MG 42, used as a light machine gun, requires a slightly higher ammunition expenditure."
Smith, Joseph E. (1973). Small Arms of the World (10th ed.). Harrisburg, PA, USA: Stackpole Co.
Smith, W.H.B. (1973). Small Arms of the World (10th ed.). Stackpole. pp. 437–442.
Willbanks, James: Machine Guns: An Illustrated History of Their Impact, page 115. ABC-CLIO, 2004.
MG 42 Machine Gun, World War II Database
Michael Duffy (2009-08-22). "Encyclopedia - Spandau Gun". Firstworldwar.com. Retrieved 2016-12-08.
"MG34 & MG42 Machine Guns". olive-drab.com. Retrieved 17 February 2017. "references German Automatic Weapons of World War II"
Hogg, Ian V., & Weeks, John. Military Small-Arms of the 20th century (London: Arms & Armour Press, 1977), p.183, "US Rifle, Caliber .30in ('Garand'), M1-M1E9, MiC, M1D, T26".
OSPREY. Elite PUBLISHING. World War II Infantry. Tactics. Squad and Platoon. p. 22-23 Dr. Stephen Bull, OSPREY. Elite PUBLISHING
Murray, Dave. "The German Infantry Platoon". avalanchepress.com. Avalanche Press. Retrieved 18 February 2017.
"Ingram MAC-10 (M10) Submachine Gun (SMG)". militaryfactory.com. Retrieved 17 February 2017.
"MG 42 and MG 3 machine gun". World Guns. Retrieved 18 February 2017.
"M240B - Machine Gun". armystudyguide.com. Retrieved 17 February 2017.
Barrels and Bullets: Conventional Versus Polygonal Rifling by Dennis Cantrell 06/08/2010
Lafette 34 & 42
The evolution of the Lafette 42
"SIG MG 710 machine gun". modernfirearms.net. Retrieved 24 February 2017.
US T24 Machine gun (MG 42) Retrieved 1 July 2014
Barnes, Frank (2014). Cartridges of the World (14th ed.). p. 509. ISBN 1440242658.
Smith, W.H.B (1973). Small Arms of the World (10th ed.). Stackpole. p. 442.
Shepherd, Christian (2015-04-11). "Machine Gun 42". Tactical-life.com. Retrieved 2016-12-08.
G3 Defence Magazine August 2010. En.calameo.com (2010-08-04). Retrieved on 2010-10-18.
"1945–1970 (Zavodi crvena zastava)" (in Serbian). Zastava. Archived from the original on 21 November 2010. Retrieved 10 October 2010.
"Peshmerga vs. the Islamic State: The Road to Mosul". Vice News. Retrieved 2015-10-11.
"1945 – 1970 | Zastava-arms". Zastava-arms.rs. Retrieved 2016-12-08.
"Rheinmetall MG3 (Maschinengewehr Modell 3) General Purpose Machine Gun (GPMG)". militaryfactory.com. Retrieved 26 February 2017.
Military Small Arms of the 20th Century. 7th Edition. by Ian V. Hogg & John S. Weeks. Krause Publications. 2000. page 379.
World Guns
Rheinmetall Machinengewehr 3
"SIG MG 710 machine gun". modernfirearms.net. Retrieved 26 February 2017. "Rate of fire 900 rounds per minute"
https://wwiiafterwwii.wordpress.com/2015/06/14/rearming-austria-wwii-weapons/
https://wwiiafterwwii.wordpress.com/2015/09/27/stg-44-in-africa-after-wwii/
http://www.alamy.com/stock-photo-a-us-marine-takes-aim-with-a-german-made-mg42-machine-gun-in-ar-ramadi-69738020.html
http://www.mg42.us/viewtopic.php?t=725
https://wwiiafterwwii.wordpress.com/2016/10/16/wwii-weapons-in-the-ayatollahs-iran/
https://sites.google.com/site/worldinventory/wiw_africa/wiw_af_libya
https://www.nbcnews.com/storyline/missing-nigeria-schoolgirls/seven-things-know-about-nigeria-n101626
Afonso, Aniceto and Gomes, Carlos de Matos, Guerra Colonial (2000), pp. 183-184, ISBN 972-46-1192-2
https://www.reddit.com/r/CombatFootage/comments/34li2a/rebel_fires_mg42_in_aleppo/
https://www.liveleak.com/view?i=5e1_1432856871
https://www.liveleak.com/view?i=f3f_1467749425
http://gordonua.com/news/war/v-odesse-sbu-zaderzhala-diversanta-s-bolshim-arsenalom-oruzhiya-57142.html
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=SJ08aPtFXDA
https://www.liveleak.com/view?i=b39_1404242329
https://wwiiafterwwii.wordpress.com/2015/07/10/wwii-german-weapons-during-the-vietnam-war/
https://wwiiafterwwii.wordpress.com/2016/04/10/wwii-equipment-of-the-bundesgrenzschutz/

    Shepherd, Christian (2015-04-11). "Machine Gun 42". Tactical-life.com. Retrieved 2016-12-08.

Bibliography

    Willbanks, James H. (2004). Machine Guns: An Illustrated History of Their Impact. Santa Barbara, California: ABC-CLIO. ISBN 978-1-85109-480-6.

External links
	Wikimedia Commons has media related to MG 42.

    Video of an MG 42 being fired on YouTube
    Nazarian`s Gun`s Recognition Guide (FILM) MG 42, proper assault (video clip)
    Modern Firearms and Ammunition: MG 42
    U.S. Report on MG 42 from World War II
    MG42 Enthusiasts and semi-auto rebuilders

[show]

    v t e 

Rheinmetall
[show]

    v t e 

German firearms and light weapons of World War II
[show]

    v t e 

General-purpose machine guns (GPMG)
Categories:

    7.92 mm firearms8 mm machine gunsGeneral-purpose machine gunsMachine guns of GermanyMedium machine gunsWorld War II infantry weapons of GermanyWorld War II machine guns

Navigation menu

    Not logged in
    Talk
    Contributions
    Create account
    Log in

    Article
    Talk

    Read
    Edit
    View history

Search

    Main page
    Contents
    Featured content
    Current events
    Random article
    Donate to Wikipedia
    Wikipedia store

Interaction

    Help
    About Wikipedia
    Community portal
    Recent changes
    Contact page

Tools

    What links here
    Related changes
    Upload file
    Special pages
    Permanent link
    Page information
    Wikidata item
    Cite this page

Print/export

    Create a book
    Download as PDF
    Printable version

In other projects

    Wikimedia Commons

Languages

    Deutsch
    Español
    Français
    한국어
    Italiano
    Latviešu
    Русский
    Tiếng Việt
    中文

Edit links

    This page was last edited on 19 March 2018, at 09:20.
    Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.

    Privacy policy
    About Wikipedia
    Disclaimers
    Contact Wikipedia
    Developers
    Cookie statement
    Mobile view
    Enable previews

    Wikimedia Foundation	
    Powered by MediaWiki	
	
Page protected with pending changes level 1
Owen Wilson
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
	
This biography of a living person needs additional citations for verification. Please help by adding reliable sources. Contentious material about living persons that is unsourced or poorly sourced must be removed immediately, especially if potentially libelous or harmful. (February 2017) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)
Owen Wilson
Owen Wilson Cannes 2011.jpg
Wilson at the 2011 Cannes Film Festival for the premiere of Midnight in Paris
Born 	Owen Cunningham Wilson
November 18, 1968 (age 49)[1]
Dallas, Texas, U.S.
Education 	University of Texas at Austin (BA)
Occupation 	Actor, producer, screenwriter
Years active 	1996–present
Children 	2
Parent(s) 	

    Laura Cunningham Wilson
    Robert Wilson

Family 	

    Andrew Wilson (brother)
    Luke Wilson (brother)

Owen Cunningham Wilson (born November 18, 1968)[2] is an American actor, producer, and screenwriter. He has had a long association with filmmaker Wes Anderson, with whom he shared writing and acting credits for Bottle Rocket (1996) and The Royal Tenenbaums (2001), the latter of which earned him a nomination for the Academy Award for Best Original Screenplay. His older brother Andrew and younger brother Luke are also actors. He is known for his roles in Frat Pack comedies and as well as voicing Lightning McQueen in the Cars franchise.

Contents

    1 Early life
    2 Career
        2.1 1990s
        2.2 2000–2009
        2.3 2010–2016
        2.4 Upcoming projects
    3 Filmography
        3.1 Film
        3.2 Television
        3.3 Video games
        3.4 Music videos
    4 References
    5 External links

Early life

Wilson was born in Dallas, Texas, the middle of 3 sons to photographer Laura (née Cunningham) Wilson (born 1939) and Robert Andrew Wilson (1941–2017), an advertising executive and operator of a public television station. His parents, of Irish descent, were originally from Massachusetts.[3] Wilson attended New Mexico Military Institute and the University of Texas at Austin, where he pursued a Bachelor of Arts degree in English.[4]
Career
1990s

After his film debut in Bottle Rocket (1996), Wilson co-wrote with Wes Anderson the script for Anderson's next two directorial films, Rushmore and The Royal Tenenbaums, for which they garnered an Oscar nomination for Best Original Screenplay. Wilson then landed a role in The Cable Guy, directed by Ben Stiller, an early admirer of Bottle Rocket. After appearing in minor roles in action films like Anaconda and Armageddon and the horror film The Haunting, Wilson appeared in two dramatic roles: a supporting role in Permanent Midnight, which starred Stiller as a drug-addicted TV writer; and the lead role (as a serial killer) in The Minus Man, in which his future girlfriend, singer Sheryl Crow, was a co-star.
2000–2009
Wilson at the London premiere of You, Me and Dupree in 2006

Wilson starred in the 2000 comedy action film Shanghai Noon alongside Jackie Chan. The film grossed nearly US$100 million worldwide. His fame continued to rise after starring alongside Ben Stiller and Will Ferrell in the 2001 film Zoolander. Gene Hackman reportedly took notice of Wilson's performance in Shanghai Noon and recommended the actor to co-star in the 2001 action film Behind Enemy Lines. Also in 2001, Wilson and Anderson collaborated on their third film, The Royal Tenenbaums, a financial and critical success. The film earned the writing team an Academy Award nomination for Best Original Screenplay.[5]

Wilson returned to the buddy-comedy genre in 2002 with the action comedy I Spy, co-starring Eddie Murphy. This big-screen remake of the television series did not perform well at the box office. He made a cameo appearance in the Girl Skateboards video Yeah Right! in 2003. He then reunited with Jackie Chan to make Shanghai Knights (2003), and co-starred in the film remake of the 1970s television series Starsky & Hutch (2004). Due to his busy schedule as an actor and an ongoing sinus condition, Wilson was unavailable to collaborate on the script for Wes Anderson's fourth feature film, The Life Aquatic with Steve Zissou. The 2004 film was ultimately co-written by filmmaker Noah Baumbach. However, Wilson did star in the film as Bill Murray's would-be son, Ned Plimpton; a role written specifically for Wilson.[6] In 2004, he and his brother, Luke played the Wright brothers in the 2004 film Around the World in 80 Days.
Wilson in May 2007

Wilson partnered with Vince Vaughn in the 2005 comedy film Wedding Crashers, which grossed over US$200M in the U.S. alone. Also in 2005, Owen collaborated with his brothers by appearing in The Wendell Baker Story, written by brother Luke, directed by Luke and brother Andrew.[7] In 2006, Wilson voiced Lightning McQueen in the Disney/Pixar film Cars, starred in You, Me and Dupree with Kate Hudson, and appeared with Stiller in Night at the Museum as cowboy Jedediah.

Wilson starred with Ben Stiller in twelve films, including The Cable Guy (1996), Permanent Midnight (1998), Meet the Parents (2000), Zoolander (2001), The Royal Tenenbaums (2001), Starsky & Hutch (2004), Meet the Fockers (2004), Night at the Museum (2006), and the sequels Night at the Museum 2: Battle of the Smithsonian (2009), Little Fockers (2010), Night at the Museum: Secret of the Tomb (2014) and Zoolander 2 (2016).

Wilson appeared in another Wes Anderson film, The Darjeeling Limited, which screened at the 45th annual New York Film Festival, the Venice Film Festival and opened September 30, 2007, co-starring Jason Schwartzman and Adrien Brody.[8] Wilson next starred in the Judd Apatow comedy, Drillbit Taylor, released in March 2008. He appeared in a film adaptation of John Grogan's best-selling memoir, Marley & Me (2008), co-starring Jennifer Aniston.[9]

He also starred in The Darjeeling Limited with Adrien Brody and Jason Schwartzman, which was selected for a DVD and Blu-ray release by The Criterion Collection in October 2010.[10] He provided the voice for the Whackbat Coach Skip in Wes Anderson's Fantastic Mr. Fox. He starred in the film The Big Year, an adaptation of Mark Obmascik's book The Big Year: A Tale of Man, Nature and Fowl Obsession.[11] The film was released in October 2011 from 20th Century Fox, and co-starred Jack Black, JoBeth Williams, Steve Martin and Rashida Jones.

Wilson is a member of the comedic acting brotherhood colloquially known as the Frat Pack. Wilson made a guest appearance on the NBC comedy Community with fellow Frat Pack member Jack Black.[12] He starred as a nostalgia-seized writer in the romantic comedy Midnight in Paris, written and directed by Woody Allen. The film was Allen's highest grossing thus far,[13] and was also well received by critics.[14]
2010–2016
Wilson at the Hall Pass red carpet, 2011

In March 2012, Wilson starred in the John Erick Dowdle thriller The Coup,[15] in which he played the role of the father of an American family that moves to Southeast Asia, only to find itself swept up in a wave of rebel violence that is overwhelming the city. Wilson later returned to the action genre for the first time since Behind Enemy Lines in 2001.[16] He also voiced turkey Reggie in Reel FX's first animated film, Free Birds.[17][18]

In 2014, Wilson appeared in Wes Anderson's acclaimed ensemble comedy The Grand Budapest Hotel and in Paul Thomas Anderson's book adaptation of Inherent Vice.[19] In 2015, he starred with Jennifer Aniston, in Peter Bogdanovich's film She's Funny That Way, and in action thriller film No Escape alongside Lake Bell and Pierce Brosnan. Wilson's films have grossed more than US$2.25  billion domestically (United States and Canada), with an average of US$75M per film. In 2017, Wilson again voiced Lightning McQueen, in Cars 3, played a suburban father in the drama Wonder, and co-starred with Ed Helms in the comedy Father Figures.[20]
Upcoming projects

Wilson will be working on a sequel to Shanghai Knights, marking his third collaboration with Jackie Chan.[21]

In April 2002, the release of the album C'mon C'mon by former girlfriend Sheryl Crow features the song "Safe and Sound", which is dedicated to Wilson in the liner notes, and is said to be an account of Wilson and Crow's relationship.[citation needed]

In August 2007, Wilson attempted suicide and was subsequently treated for depression at St. John's Health Center and Cedars-Sinai Medical Center in Los Angeles.[22][23] A few days after his hospitalization, Wilson withdrew from his role in Tropic Thunder,[24] which was produced by and co-starred his friend and frequent collaborator Ben Stiller. He was replaced by Matthew McConaughey.[25]

Wilson dated Kate Hudson in 2008 and 2009.[26][27]

In January 2011, Wilson and his girlfriend Jade Duell had a son, Robert Ford Wilson.[28][29] Wilson and Duell ended their relationship later that year.[30]

In January 2014, Caroline Lindqvist gave birth to Wilson's second son, Finn Lindqvist Wilson.[31][32][33]
Filmography
Film
Year 	Title 	Role 	Notes
1996 	Bottle Rocket 	Dignan 	Also writer
1996 	The Cable Guy 	Robin's Date 	
1997 	Anaconda 	Gary Dixon 	
1997 	As Good as It Gets 	N/A 	Associate producer
1998 	Armageddon 	Oscar Choice 	
1998 	Permanent Midnight 	Nicky 	
1998 	Rushmore 	N/A 	Writer
1999 	The Haunting 	Luke Sanderson 	
1999 	Breakfast of Champions 	Monte Rapid 	
1999 	The Minus Man 	Vann Siegert 	
2000 	Shanghai Noon 	Roy O'Bannon 	Nominated – Blockbuster Entertainment Award for Best Action Team
Nominated – Satellite Award for Best Supporting Actor: Musical or Comedy
2000 	Meet the Parents 	Kevin Rawley 	Nominated – Blockbuster Entertainment Award for Best Supporting Actor – Comedy
2001 	Zoolander 	Hansel McDonald 	Nominated – MTV Movie Award for Best On-Screen Duo
2001 	The Royal Tenenbaums 	Eli Cash 	Also writer
Nominated – Academy Award for Best Original Screenplay
Nominated – BAFTA Award for Best Original Screenplay
Nominated – Chicago Film Critics Association Award for Best Screenplay
Nominated – New York Film Critics Circle Award for Best Screenplay
Nominated – Online Film Critics Society Award for Best Original Screenplay
Nominated – Phoenix Film Critics Society Award for Best Cast
Nominated – Phoenix Film Critics Society Award for Best Original Screenplay
Nominated – Satellite Award for Best Supporting Actor: Musical or Comedy
Nominated – Toronto Film Critics Association Award for Best Screenplay
Nominated – Writers Guild of America Award for Best Original Screenplay
2001 	Behind Enemy Lines 	Lt. Chris Burnett 	
2002 	I Spy 	Alex Scott 	Nominated – Golden Raspberry Award for Worst Screen Combo
2002 	The Sweatbox 	Himself 	Archive footage; haven't been released to the public
2003 	Shanghai Knights 	Roy O'Bannon 	Nominated – MTV Movie Award for Best On-Screen Duo
2003 	Yeah Right! 	Himself 	Cameo
2004 	The Big Bounce 	Jack Ryan 	
2004 	Starsky & Hutch 	Ken Hutchinson 	MTV Movie Award for Best Kiss
Nominated – MTV Movie Award for Best On-Screen Duo
Nominated – People's Choice Award for Favorite On-Screen Chemistry
Nominated – Teen Choice Award for Choice Movie: Comedy Actor
Nominated – Teen Choice Award for Choice Movie: Chemistry
2004 	Around the World in 80 Days 	Wilbur Wright 	
2004 	The Life Aquatic with Steve Zissou 	Ned Plimpton 	Nominated – Boston Society of Film Critics Award for Best Cast
Nominated – Broadcast Film Critics Association Award for Best Cast
2004 	Meet the Fockers 	Kevin Rawley 	
2005 	The Wendell Baker Story 	Neil King 	
2005 	Wedding Crashers 	John Beckwith 	MTV Movie Award for Best On-Screen Duo
People's Choice Award for Favorite On-Screen Match-Up
Nominated – MTV Movie Award for Best Comedic Performance
Nominated – Teen Choice Award for Choice Movie: Liplock
2006 	Cars 	Lightning McQueen (voice) 	
2006 	Mater and the Ghostlight 	Lightning McQueen (voice) 	Short
2006 	You, Me and Dupree 	Randolph Dupree 	Also producer
2006 	Night at the Museum 	Jedediah 	Uncredited
2007 	The Darjeeling Limited 	Francis Whitman 	
2008 	Drillbit Taylor 	Drillbit Taylor 	
2008 	Marley & Me 	John Grogan 	Nominated – Teen Choice Award for Choice Movie: Liplock
2008 	Over Her Dead Body 	Guy on Phone 	Uncredited
2009 	Night at the Museum: Battle of the Smithsonian 	Jedediah 	
2009 	Fantastic Mr. Fox 	Coach Skip (voice) 	
2010 	Marmaduke 	Marmaduke (voice) 	
2010 	How Do You Know 	Matty Reynolds 	
2010 	Little Fockers 	Kevin Rawley 	
2011 	Hall Pass 	Rick 	
2011 	Midnight in Paris 	Gil 	Nominated – Comedy Award for Comedy Actor
Nominated – Golden Globe Award for Best Actor – Motion Picture Musical or Comedy[34]
Nominated – Screen Actors Guild Award for Outstanding Performance by a Cast in a Motion Picture[35]
Nominated – Phoenix Film Critics Society Award for Best Cast
2011 	Cars 2 	Lightning McQueen (voice) 	Nominated – People's Choice Award for Favorite Animated Movie Voice
2011 	The Big Year 	Kenny Bostick 	
2013 	The Internship 	Nick Campbell 	
2013 	Free Birds 	Reggie (voice) 	
2013 	Are You Here 	Steve Dallas 	
2014 	The Grand Budapest Hotel 	M. Chuck 	
2014 	The Hero of Color City 	Ricky The Dragon (voice) 	
2014 	Inherent Vice 	Coy Harlingen 	
2014 	Night at the Museum: Secret of the Tomb 	Jedediah 	
2015 	She's Funny That Way 	Arnold Albertson 	
2015 	No Escape 	Jack Dwyer 	
2016 	Zoolander 2 	Hansel 	
2016 	Masterminds 	Steve Chambers 	
2017 	Lost in London 	Himself 	
2017 	Cars 3 	Lightning McQueen (voice) 	
2017 	Wonder 	Nate Pullman 	
2017 	Father Figures 	Kyle Reynolds 	
2018 	Dolphins 	Himself 	Narrator
Television
Year 	Title 	Role 	Notes
1999 	Heat Vision and Jack 	Heat Vision (voice) 	Short
2001 	King of the Hill 	Rhett Van Der Graaf (voice) 	Episode: "Luanne Virgin 2.0"
2010 	Community 	Other Study Group's Leader 	Episode: "Investigative Journalism"; uncredited
2013 	Drunk History 	John Harvey Kellogg 	Episode: "Detroit"
2014 	Cars Toons: Tales From Radiator Springs 	Lightning McQueen (voice) 	Episode: "The Radiator Springs 500 ½"
2016 	Saturday Night Live 	Hansel 	Episode: "Larry David/The 1975"
Video games
Year 	Title 	Role
2006 	Cars 	Lightning McQueen
2012 	Kinect Rush: A Disney-Pixar Adventure
2014 	Cars: Fast as Lightning
Music videos
Year 	Song 	Artist
2006 	God's Gonna Cut You Down 	Johnny Cash
2013 	Christmas in L.A. 	The Killers
References

"Monitor". Entertainment Weekly (1181). November 18, 2011. p. 34.
"Today in history: November 18". msnbc.com. November 18, 2006. Retrieved April 13, 2012.
Stuever, Hank. "The Brothers Grin", The Washington Post, July 20, 2006.
"Owen Wilson: Snapshot". Retrieved June 12, 2014.
"Wes Anderson - Biography". Biography.com. Biography.com. Retrieved August 28, 2015.
Topel, Fred (December 23, 2004). "Interview: Wes Anderson". CHUD.com. Retrieved September 29, 2006.
Murray, Rebecca. "The Wendell Baker Story is a Real Wilson Family Affair". About.com. Retrieved August 27, 2007.
"The Darjeeling Limited to premiere in NYC". Business of Cinema. August 19, 2007. Archived from the original on September 28, 2007. Retrieved August 27, 2007.
Fleming, Michael (August 19, 2007). "Wilson, Aniston fetch Fox feature Pair to star in 'Marley & Me'". Variety. Retrieved August 27, 2007.
Shoun, Holly (July 17, 2010). "The Darjeeling Limited up for Criterion Release". Owenation.com. Retrieved July 17, 2010.
Shoun, Holly (March 13, 2010). "Steve Martin Goes Birdwatching". Owenation.com. Archived from the original on March 19, 2012. Retrieved June 23, 2010.
Young, John (January 15, 2010). "'Community' recap: Jack Black attacks!". Entertainment Weekly. Retrieved August 20, 2013.
O'Neal, Sean (June 23, 2011). "Midnight in Paris could finally make something of this Woody Allen guy". AVclub.com. Retrieved June 29, 2011.
"Midnight in Paris". Rotten Tomatoes. June 10, 2011. Retrieved June 29, 2011.
"Owen Wilson Leads The Coup Overseas". Dread Central. April 24, 2012. Retrieved June 24, 2012.
"Owen Wilson Returns to Action Mode in 'The Coup'". Deadline. Retrieved April 24, 2012.
Shaw, Lucas (February 22, 2013). "Relativity Moves 'Turkeys' Up a Year; Amy Poehler Joins Voice Cast (Exclusive)". The Wrap. Retrieved February 23, 2013.
Sperling, Nicole (March 17, 2010). "Owen Wilson and Woody Harrelson pair up for kid-flick 'Turkeys'". Entertainment Weekly. Retrieved February 23, 2013.
"Owen Wilson Latest to Join Paul Thomas Anderson's Inherent Vice [UPDATED]". May 10, 2013. Retrieved June 15, 2014.
Dave McNary. "Ed Helms-Owen Wilson Comedy 'Bastards' Changes Title to 'Father Figures'". Variety.
"Shanghai Dawn: Chan and Wilson team up for a third time". Empire. 20 February 2003. Retrieved 2 May 2017.
"Owen Wilson Suicide Attempt Confirmed". MTV News.
"Owen Wilson: Battling Depression". Newsweek. October 14, 2007. Retrieved June 14, 2008.
"Owen Wilson comedy role is recast". BBC News. September 20, 2007. Archived from the original on November 7, 2010.
Horn, John; Piccalo, (March 20, 2008). "Limited exposure". Los Angeles Times
"Owen Wilson to wed Kate Hudson – a year after he 'tried to kill himself' when she dumped him". Daily Mail. London, UK. May 11, 2008.
"Cele-bitchy – The Sun claims Kate Hudson & Owen Wilson are trying to get pregnant". celebitchy.com.
"Owen Wilson becomes a father". USA Today. January 15, 2011. Retrieved January 17, 2011.
"Revealed: Owen Wilson Names Son Robert Ford". People. January 19, 2011. Retrieved January 19, 2011.
Emery, Debbie (June 24, 2011). "Owen Wilson 'ends relationship with mother of his baby boy'". Daily Mail. Retrieved October 9, 2013.
Takeda, Allison (October 12, 2013). "Owen Wilson Expecting Baby With Married Fitness Trainer Caroline Lindqvist". Us Weekly. Retrieved October 12, 2013.
Gicas, Peter (February 11, 2014). "Name of Owen Wilson's New Son Revealed—Check It Out!". E! News. Retrieved February 11, 2014.
Leon, Anya (January 31, 2014). "Owen Wilson Welcomes Second Son". People. Retrieved January 31, 2014.
"Nominations & Winners". Hollywood Foreign Press Association. Retrieved December 20, 2011.

    "The 18th Annual Screen Actors Guild Awards". Retrieved January 31, 2012.

External links
Find more about
Owen Wilson
at Wikipedia's sister projects

    Definitions from Wiktionary
    Media from Wikimedia Commons
    News from Wikinews
    Quotations from Wikiquote
    Texts from Wikisource
    Textbooks from Wikibooks
    Learning resources from Wikiversity

    Owen Wilson on IMDb
    Owen Wilson at the TCM Movie Database
    Owen Wilson at Box Office Mojo
    Owen Wilson at People.com

[show]
Awards for Owen Wilson

    P vip.svgBiography portal SMirC-laugh.svgComedy portal Video-x-generic.svgFilm portal USA flag on television.svgTelevision in the United States portal 

Authority control 	

    WorldCat Identities VIAF: 51901914 LCCN: no97077233 ISNI: 0000 0001 1472 6150 GND: 130301523 SUDOC: 081261802 BNF: cb142395576 (data) BIBSYS: 2132557 MusicBrainz: ade30e8e-acbc-4aab-912d-0b146bb49870 SNAC: w64f2q2w 

Categories:

    1968 births20th-century American male actors21st-century American male actorsAmerican film producersAmerican male film actorsAmerican male screenwritersAmerican male television actorsAmerican male voice actorsAmerican people of Irish descentLiving peopleMale actors from Austin, TexasMale actors from DallasNew Mexico Military Institute alumniSt. Mark's School (Texas) alumniUniversity of Texas at Austin alumniWriters from Austin, Texas

Navigation menu

    Not logged in
    Talk
    Contributions
    Create account
    Log in

    Article
    Talk

    Read
    Edit
    View history

Search

    Main page
    Contents
    Featured content
    Current events
    Random article
    Donate to Wikipedia
    Wikipedia store

Interaction

    Help
    About Wikipedia
    Community portal
    Recent changes
    Contact page

Tools

    What links here
    Related changes
    Upload file
    Special pages
    Permanent link
    Page information
    Wikidata item
    Cite this page

Print/export

    Create a book
    Download as PDF
    Printable version

In other projects

    Wikimedia Commons
    Wikiquote

Languages

    Deutsch
    Español
    Français
    한국어
    Italiano
    Русский
    Tagalog
    Tiếng Việt
    中文

Edit links

    This page was last edited on 22 March 2018, at 14:20.
    Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.

    Privacy policy
    About Wikipedia
    Disclaimers
    Contact Wikipedia
    Developers
    Cookie statement
    Mobile view
    Enable previews

    Wikimedia Foundation	
    Powered by MediaWiki
	
Asclepias tuberosa
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
  (Redirected from Butterfly Weed)
Asclepias tuberosa
Asclepias tuberosa in Farmington, CT 4.jpg
Conservation status

Apparently Secure (NatureServe)
Scientific classification e
Kingdom: 	Plantae
Clade: 	Angiosperms
Clade: 	Eudicots
Clade: 	Asterids
Order: 	Gentianales
Family: 	Apocynaceae
Genus: 	Asclepias
Species: 	A. tuberosa
Binomial name
Asclepias tuberosa
L.
Synonyms[1]

    Acerates decumbens Decne.
    Asclepias decumbens L.
    Asclepias elliptica Raf.
    Asclepias lutea Raf. nom. illeg.
    Asclepias revoluta Raf.
    Asclepias rolfsii Britton ex Vail

Asclepias tuberosa is a species of milkweed native to eastern North America. It is a perennial plant growing to 0.3–1 metre (1 ft 0 in–3 ft 3 in) tall, with clustered orange or yellow flowers from early summer to early autumn. The leaves are spirally arranged, lanceolate, 5–12 cm long, and 2–3 cm broad.

This plant favors dry, sand or gravel soil, but has also been reported on stream margins. It requires full sun.

It is commonly known as butterfly weed because of the butterflies that are attracted to the plant by its color and its copious production of nectar. It is also the larval food plant of the queen and monarch butterflies. Hummingbirds, bees and other insects are also attracted.[2]

Use of the plant is contraindicated in pregnancy, during lactation or with infants due to the small amount of cardiac glycosides.[3]

Contents

    1 Identification
    2 Propagation
    3 Subspecies
    4 Common names
    5 Gallery
    6 Footnotes
    7 References
    8 External links

Identification

The plant looks similar to the lanceolate milkweed (Asclepias lanceolata), but is uniquely identified by the larger number of flowers, and the hairy stems that are not milky when broken. It is most commonly found in fields with dry soil.
Propagation

Most easily propagated by seed. Sown outdoors after frost, a plant will flower and produce seed in the third year. Difficult to transplant once established.[4][5]
Subspecies

    Asclepias tuberosa subsp. interior – (Central United States, Ontario and Quebec[6])
    Asclepias tuberosa subsp. rolfsii – Rolfs milkweed (Southeastern United States)
    Asclepias tuberosa subsp. tuberosa – (Eastern United States)

Common names

Common names include butterfly weed,[7] Canada root, chieger flower,[7] chiggerflower, fluxroot, Indian paintbrush, Indian posy, orange milkweed, orange root,[8] orange Swallow-wort, pleurisy root,[7] silky swallow-wort, tuber root, yellow milkweed, white-root, windroot, butterfly love, butterflyweed, and butterfly milkweed.[9]
Gallery

    Entire plant from the ground to the flower

    Young stems during spring

    A young leaf

    An emerging flower head

    Closeup of the hairy stems

    Closeup of unopened buds

    Flower head

    Closeup showing unopened, opening, and fully opened flower buds

    Orange flowers

    Red-striped orange flowers

    Yellow flowers

    Seedpod
    Asclepias tuberosa 004.JPG

Footnotes

"The Plant list: A Working List of All plant Species".
Schillo, Rebecca (2011). Cummings, Nina, ed. "Native Landscaping Takes Root in Chicago". In The Field. The Field Museum: 13.
University of Texas, Austin
Loewer, Peter 'Native Perennials For the Southeast' Cool Springs Press. Nashville, Tenn. 2005 ISBN 1-59186-121-7
Druse, Ken 'Making More Plants The Science, Art, and Joy of Propagation' Abrams. New York, NY. 2012 ISBN 0-517-70787-X
Species profile on VASCAN. Retrieved on February 21, 2018.
"Asclepias tuberosa". Germplasm Resources Information Network (GRIN). Agricultural Research Service (ARS), United States Department of Agriculture (USDA). Retrieved 17 December 2017.
anonymous (2008). "Featured Native Plant: Butterfly Weed" (PDF). Wild Ones: Native Plants, Natural Landscapes. 6 (4).

    Dickinson, T.; Metsger, D.; Bull, J.; & Dickinson, R. (2004) ROM Field Guide to Wildflowers of Ontario. Toronto:Royal Ontario Museum, p. 138.

References

    Peterson, Roger Tory; Margaret McKenny (1968). A Field Guide to Wildflowers of Northeastern and North-central North America. Boston: Houghton Mifflin Company. ISBN 0-395-18325-1.
    Photo of a J.J. Audubon Plate Clay-Colored Sparrow perched atop Asclepias tuberosa

External links
	Wikimedia Commons has media related to Asclepias tuberosa.
	Wikispecies has information related to Asclepias tuberosa
	The Wikibook Horticulture has a page on the topic of: Asclepias tuberosa

    Butterfly weed brief information and pictures
    Missouri Botanical Garden Asclepias tuberosa

Taxon identifiers 	

    Wd: Q311131 EoL: 581278 EPPO: ASCTU GBIF: 3170305 GRIN: 4480 iNaturalist: 47912 IPNI: 94704-1 ITIS: 30313 NCBI: 141466 Plant List: kew-2655244 PLANTS: ASTU Tropicos: 2603851 VASCAN: 2713 

Categories:

    NatureServe apparently secure speciesAsclepiasButterfly food plantsFlora of CanadaFlora of the Eastern United StatesPlants described in 1753Garden plants of North AmericaPlants used in traditional Native American medicine

Navigation menu

    Not logged in
    Talk
    Contributions
    Create account
    Log in

    Article
    Talk

    Read
    Edit
    View history

Search

    Main page
    Contents
    Featured content
    Current events
    Random article
    Donate to Wikipedia
    Wikipedia store

Interaction

    Help
    About Wikipedia
    Community portal
    Recent changes
    Contact page

Tools

    What links here
    Related changes
    Upload file
    Special pages
    Permanent link
    Page information
    Wikidata item
    Cite this page

Print/export

    Create a book
    Download as PDF
    Printable version

In other projects

    Wikimedia Commons
    Wikispecies

Languages

    العربية
    Deutsch
    Diné bizaad
    Español
    فارسی
    Français
    Svenska
    Tiếng Việt
    中文

Edit links

    This page was last edited on 16 March 2018, at 14:22.
    Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.

    Privacy policy
    About Wikipedia
    Disclaimers
    Contact Wikipedia
    Developers
    Cookie statement
    Mobile view
    Enable previews

    Wikimedia Foundation	
    Powered by MediaWiki	
	
Drywall
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
Drywall is delivered to a building site on a flatbed truck and unloaded with a forked material handler crane. The bulk drywall sheets are unloaded directly to upper floors via a window or exterior doorway.

Drywall (also known as plasterboard, wallboard, gypsum panel, sheet rock, or gypsum board) is a panel made of calcium sulfate dihydrate (gypsum), with or without additives, typically extruded between thick sheets of facer and backer paper, utilized in the construction of interior walls and ceilings.[1] The plaster is mixed with fiber (typically paper and/or fibreglass), plasticizer, foaming agent, and various additives that can decrease mildew, increase fire resistance, and lower water absorption.

Drywall construction became prevalent in North America as a speedier alternative to traditional lath and plaster.[2]

Contents

    1 History
    2 Manufacture
    3 Specifications
        3.1 Canada and the United States
        3.2 Europe
        3.3 Australia and New Zealand
    4 Construction techniques
    5 Sound control
    6 Water damage and mold
    7 High sulfur drywall illness and corrosion issues
    8 Fire resistance
        8.1 Type X drywall
        8.2 Type C drywall
    9 North American market
        9.1 Types available in the US and Canada
    10 Waste
    11 See also
    12 References
    13 External links

History

The first plasterboard plant in the UK was opened in 1888 in Rochester, Kent.[citation needed] Sackett Board was invented in 1894 by Augustine Sackett and Fred Kane, graduates of Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute. It was made by layering plaster within four plies of wool felt paper. Sheets were 36" × 36" × 1/4" thick with open (untaped) edges.[3]

Gypsum board evolved between 1910 and 1930 beginning with wrapped board edges and elimination of the two inner layers of felt paper in favor of paper-based facings. In 1910 United States Gypsum Corporation bought Sackett Plaster Board Company and by 1917 came out with a product they called Sheetrock.[4] Providing efficiency of installation, it was developed additionally as a measure of fire resistance.[5] Later air entrainment technology made boards lighter and less brittle, then joint treatment materials and systems also evolved.[3] Rock lath (gypsum lath) was an early substrate for plaster. An alternative to traditional wood or metal lath, it was a panel made up of compressed gypsum plaster board that was sometimes grooved or punched with holes to allow wet plaster to key into its surface. As it evolved, it was faced with paper impregnated with gypsum crystals that bonded with the applied facing layer of plaster.[6]
Vertically hung drywall with joint compound.

In 2002 the European Commission imposed fines totaling €478 million on the companies Lafarge, BPB, and Gyproc Benelux, which had operated a cartel on the market which affected 80% of consumers in France, the United Kingdom, Germany and the Benelux countries.[7]
Manufacture

A wallboard panel consists of a layer of gypsum plaster sandwiched between two layers of paper. The raw gypsum, CaSO4·2 H2O, is heated to drive off the water then slightly rehydrated to produce the hemihydrate of calcium sulfate (CaSO4·½ H2O). The plaster is mixed with fibre (typically paper and/or fibreglass), plasticizer, foaming agent, finely ground gypsum crystal as an accelerator, EDTA, starch or other chelate as a retarder, various additives that may decrease mildew and increase fire resistance, and wax emulsion or silanes for lower water absorption. The board is then formed by sandwiching a core of the wet mixture between two sheets of heavy paper or fibreglass mats. When the core sets it is then dried in a large drying chamber, and the sandwich becomes rigid and strong enough for use as a building material.

Drying chambers typically use natural gas today. To dry 1 MSF (1,000 square feet (93 m2)) of wallboard, between 1,750,000 and 2,490,000 BTU (1,850,000 and 2,630,000 kJ) is required. Organic dispersants/plasticisers are used so the slurry will flow during manufacture, and to reduce the water and hence the drying time.[8] Coal-fired power stations include devices called scrubbers to remove sulphur from their exhaust emissions. The sulphur is absorbed by powdered limestone in a process called flue-gas desulphurization (FGD), which produces a number of new substances. One is called "FGD gypsum". This is commonly used in drywall construction in the United States and elsewhere.[9][10]
Specifications
Canada and the United States

Drywall panels in the United States are manufactured in 48-inch (1.2 m), 54-inch (1.4 m) and 96-inch (2.4 m) wide panels in varying lengths to suit the application, though 48-inch is by far the most common width. Lengths up to 12 feet (3.6 m) are commonly available, though the most common length is 8 feet (2.4 m). Common panel thicknesses are 1⁄2-inch (13 mm) and 5⁄8-inch (16 mm), with panels also available in 1⁄4-inch (6.4 mm), 3⁄8-inch (9.5 mm), 3/4-inch (19.0 mm) and 1-inch (25.4 mm) for specific applications.
Europe

In Europe plasterboard is manufactured in metric sizes, with the common sizes being corollaries of old imperial sizes. Most plasterboard is made in 120 cm-wide sheets, though 90 cm and 60 cm wide sheets are also made. 120 cm wide plasterboard is most commonly made in 240 cm lengths, though 250, 260, 270, 280, 300 cm and even longer (if ordered) are commonly available. Thicknesses of plasterboard available are 9.5 mm to 25 mm.[11]

Plasterboard is commonly made with one of three different edge treatments: tapered edge, where the long edges of the board are tapered with a wide bevel at the front to allow for jointing materials to be finished flush with the main board face; plain edge, used where the whole surface will receive a thin coating (skim coat) of finishing plaster; and, finally, beveled on all four sides, used in products specialized for roofing. However four side chamfered drywall is not currently offered by major UK manufacturers for general use.
Australia and New Zealand

The term plasterboard is used in Australia and New Zealand.[12] Both countries use the metric system in building, and plasterboard is manufactured in thicknesses of 10 mm, 13 mm, and 16 mm, and sometimes other thicknesses up to 25 mm. Panels are commonly sold in 1200 x 2400 mm, 1200 x 4800 mm, and 1200 x 6000 mm sheets. Sheets are usually secured to either a timber or cold formed steel frames anywhere from 150 to 300 mm centres along the beam and 400 to 600 mm across members.

Various companies, such as Boral and CSR, manufacture plasterboard under various brand names including Gyprock.
Construction techniques

As an alternative to a week-long plaster application, an entire house can be drywalled in one or two days by two experienced drywallers, and drywall is easy enough to use that it can be installed by many amateur home carpenters. In large-scale commercial construction, the work of installing and finishing drywall is often split between the drywall mechanics, or hangers, who install the wallboard, and the tapers and mudmen, or float crew, who finish the joints and cover the fastener heads with drywall compound.[citation needed] Dry wall can be finished anywhere from a level 0 to a level 5, where 0 is not finished in any fashion and 5 is the most "pristine". Depending on how significant the finish is to the customer the extra steps in the finish may or may not be necessary, though priming and painting of drywall is recommended in any location where it may be exposed to any wear.
Drywall screws are designed to be self-tapping.

Drywall is cut to size, using a large T-square, by scoring the paper on the finished side (usually white) with a utility knife, breaking the sheet along the cut, and cutting the paper backing. Small features such as holes for outlets and light switches are usually cut using a keyhole saw or a small high-speed bit in a rotary tool. Drywall is then fixed to the wall structure with nails or drywall screws and often glue. Drywall fasteners, also referred to as drywall clips or stops, are gaining popularity in both residential and commercial construction. Drywall fasteners are used for supporting interior drywall corners and replacing the non-structural wood or metal blocking that traditionally was used to install drywall. Their function serves to save on material and labour expenses, to minimize call-backs due to truss uplift, to increase energy efficiency, and to make plumbing and electrical installation simpler.

Drywall screws heads have a curved taper, which allows them to self-pilot and install rapidly without having to be punched through the paper cover. When finished driving, these screws are countersunk slightly into the drywall. Screws for light-gauge steel framing have an acute point and finely spaced threads. If the steel framing is heavier than 20-gauge, self-tapping screws with finely spaced threads must be used. In some applications, the drywall may be attached to the wall with adhesives.
Applying 'joint compound' to drywall.

After the sheets are secured to the wall studs or ceiling joists, the installer conceals the seams between drywall sheets with 'joint tape' and several layers of 'joint compound' (sometimes called 'mud'), typically spread with a taping knife or putty knife. This compound is also applied to any screw holes or defects. The compound is allowed to air dry then typically sanded smooth before painting. Alternatively, for a better finish, the entire wall may be given a 'skim coat', a thin layer (about 1 mm or 1/16 inch) of finishing compound, to minimize the visual differences between the paper and mudded areas after painting.

Another similar skim coating is always done in a process called veneer plastering, although it is done slightly thicker (about 2 mm or 1/8 inch). Veneering uses a slightly different specialized setting compound ("finish plaster") that contains gypsum and lime putty. This application uses blueboard, which has special treated paper to accelerate the setting of the gypsum plaster component. This setting has far less shrinkage than the air-dry compounds normally used in drywall, so it only requires one coat. Blueboard also has square edges rather than the tapered-edge drywall boards. The tapered drywall boards are used to countersink the tape in taped jointing whereas the tape in veneer plastering is buried beneath a level surface. One coat veneer plaster over dry board is an intermediate style step between full multi-coat "wet" plaster and the limited joint-treatment-only given "dry" wall.
Sound control

The method of installation and type of drywall can reduce sound transmission through walls and ceilings. Several builders' books state that thicker drywall reduces sound transmission, but engineering manuals recommend using multiple layers of drywall, sometimes of different thicknesses and glued together, or special types of drywall designed to reduce noise.[13] Also important are the construction details of the framing with steel studs, wider stud spacing, double studding, insulation, and other details reducing sound transmission. Sound transmission class (STC) ratings can be increased from 33 for an ordinary stud-wall to as high as 59 with double 1/2" drywall on both sides of a wood stud wall with resilient channels on one side and fiberglass batt insulation between the studs.[14]

Sound transmission may be slightly reduced using regular ​5⁄8-inch panels (with or without light-gauge resilient metal channels and/or insulation), but it is more effective to use two layers of drywall, sometimes in combination with other factors, or specially designed, sound-resistant drywall.[15]
Water damage and mold
Drywall water damage in a closet.

Drywall is highly vulnerable to moisture due to the inherent properties of the materials that comprise it: gypsum, paper, and organic additives and binders. Gypsum will soften with exposure to moisture, and eventually turn to a gooey paste with prolonged immersion, such as during a flood. During such incidents, some or all of the drywall in an entire building may need to be removed and replaced. Furthermore, the paper facings and organic additives mixed with the gypsum core are food for mold.

The porosity of the board—introduced during manufacturing to reduce the weight of the board, lowering construction time and transportation costs—enables water to rapidly reach the core through capillary action, where mold can grow inside. Water that enters a room from overhead may cause ceiling drywall tape to separate from the ceiling as a result of the grooves immediately behind the tape where the drywall pieces meet becoming saturated. The drywall may also soften around the screws holding the drywall in place and with the aid of gravity, the weight of the water may cause the drywall to sag and eventually collapse, requiring replacement.

Drywall's paper facings are edible to termites, which can eat the paper if they are infesting a wall cavity that is covered with drywall. This causes the painted surface to crumble to the touch, its paper backing material having been eaten. In addition to the necessity of patching the damaged surface and repainting, if enough of the paper has been eaten, the gypsum core can easily crack or crumble without it and the drywall must be removed and replaced.
Drywall damage caused by termites eating the paper, causing the paint to crumble.

In many circumstances, especially when the drywall has been exposed to water or moisture for less than 48 hours, professional restoration experts familiar with structural drying methodologies can introduce rapid drying techniques designed to eliminate necessary elements required to support microbial activity while also restoring most or all of the drywall and thus avoiding the cost, inconvenience, and difficulty of removing and replacing the affected drywall.

It is for these reasons that greenboard[16] and ideally cement board are used for rooms expected to have high humidity, primarily kitchens, bathrooms, and laundry rooms.
High sulfur drywall illness and corrosion issues
Main article: Chinese drywall

A substantial amount of defective drywall was imported into the United States from China and incorporated into tens of thousands of homes during rebuilding in 2006 and 2007 following Hurricane Katrina and in other places. Complaints included foul odour, health effects, and corrosion of metal within the structure. This is caused by the emission of sulphurous gases. The same drywall was sold in Asia without problems resulting,[citation needed] but U.S. homes are built much more tightly than homes in China, with less ventilation. Volatile sulphur compounds, including hydrogen sulphide, have been detected as emissions from the imported drywall and may be linked to health problems. These compounds are emitted from many different types of drywall.

A number of lawsuits are underway in many jurisdictions, but many of the sheets of drywall are simply marked, "Made in China", thus making identification of the manufacturer difficult. An investigation by the Consumer Product Safety Commission, CPSC, was underway in 2009.[17] In November 2009, the CPSC reported a "strong association" between Chinese drywall and corrosion of pipes and wires reported by thousands of homeowners in the United States. The issue was resolved in 2011 and now all drywall must be tested for volatile sulfur and any containing more than 10 ppm is unable to be sold in the US.
Fire resistance
	
This section needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (February 2017) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)

Drywall is made primarily from gypsum (CaSO4•2H2O). As its chemical formula shows, gypsum contains chemically combined water (approximately 50% by volume). When gypsum panels are exposed to fire, heat is absorbed as a portion of the combined water is driven off as steam. This chemical process is called calcination. The thermal energy that converts the water to steam is thus diverted and absorbed, keeping the opposite side of the gypsum panels cool as long as there is crystalline water left to be converted into steam or until the gypsum panel is breached. In the case of regular gypsum board, as the crystalline water is driven off, the reduction of volume within the gypsum core causes large cracks to form, eventually causing the panel to fail due to loss of structural integrity. This is similar to the cracking that can be observed in a dry lake or river bed.[18]

When used as a component in fire barriers, drywall is a passive fire protection item. In its natural state, gypsum contains the water of crystallization bound in the form of hydrates. When exposed to heat or fire, this water is vaporized, over a range of temperatures from 80° to 170 °C (see calcium sulphate), retarding heat transfer until the water in the gypsum is gone. This makes drywall an ablative material because as the hydrates sublime, a crumbly dust is left behind, which, along with the paper, is sacrificial. Generally, the more layers of Type X drywall one adds, the more one increases the fire-resistance of the assembly, up to four hours for walls and three hours for ceilings.[19] Evidence of this can be found both in publicly available design catalogues, including DIN 4102 Part 4 and the Canadian Building Code on the topic, as well as common certification listings, including certification listings provided by Underwriters Laboratories and Underwriters Laboratories of Canada (ULC). "Type X" drywall is formulated by adding glass fibres to the gypsum, to increase the resistance to fires, especially once the hydrates are spent, which leaves the gypsum in powder form. Type X is typically the material chosen to construct walls and ceilings that are required to have a fire-resistance rating.

Fire testing of drywall assemblies for the purpose of expanding national catalogues, such as the National Building Code of Canada, Germany's Part 4 of DIN4102 and its British cousin BS476, are a matter of routine research and development work in more than one nation and can be sponsored jointly by national authorities and representatives of the drywall industry. For example, the National Research Council of Canada routinely publishes such findings.[20] The results are printed as approved designs in the back of the building code. Generally, exposure of drywall on a panel furnace removes the water and calcines the exposed drywall and also heats the studs and fasteners holding the drywall. This typically results in deflection of the assembly towards the fire, as that is the location where the sublimation occurs, which weakens the assembly, due to the fire influence.

Cosponsored tests result in code recognized designs with assigned fire-resistance ratings. The resulting designs become part of the code and are not limited to use by any one manufacturer. However, individual manufacturers may also have proprietary designs that they have had third-party tested and approved. This is provided that the material used in the field configuration can be demonstrated to meet the minimum requirements of Type X drywall (such as an entry in the appropriate category of the UL Building Materials Directory or in the Gypsum Association Fire Resistance and Sound Control Design Manual) and that sufficient layers and thicknesses are used. Fire test reports for such unique third party tests are confidential but may be made available to code officials upon special request.

It's important to consider deflection of drywall assemblies to maintain their assembly integrity to preserve their ratings. Deflection of drywall assemblies can vary somewhat from one test to another. Importantly, penetrants do not follow the deflection movement of the drywall assemblies they penetrate. For example, see cable tray movement in a German test. It is, therefore, important to test firestops in full scale wall panel tests, so that the deflection of each applicable assembly can be taken into account.

The size of the test wall assembly alone is not the only consideration for firestop tests. If the penetrants are mounted to and hung off the drywall assembly itself during the test, this does not constitute a realistic deflection exposure insofar as the firestop is concerned. In reality, on a construction site, penetrants are hung off the ceiling above. Penetrants may increase in length, push and pull as a result of operational temperature changes (e.g., hot and cold water in a pipe), particularly in a fire. But it is a physical impossibility to have the penetrants follow the movement of drywall assemblies that they penetrate, since they are not mounted to the drywalls in a building.

It is, therefore, counterproductive to suspend penetrants from the drywall assembly during a fire test. As downward deflection of the drywall assembly and buckling towards the fire occurs, the top of the firestop is squeezed and the bottom of the firestop is pulled. This is motion above that caused by expansion of metallic penetrants due to heat exposure in a fire. Both types of motion occur because metal first expands in a fire, and then softens once the critical temperature has been reached, as is explained under structural steel. To simulate the drywall deflection effect, one can simply mount the penetrants to the steel frame holding the test assembly. The operational and fire-induced motion of the penetrants, which is independent of the assemblies penetrated, can be separately arranged.

Drywall provides a thermal resistance R-value (in US units) of 0.32 for ​3⁄8-inch board, 0.45 for ​1⁄2-inch, 0.56 for ​5⁄8-inch, and 0.83 for 1-inch board. In addition to increased R-value, thicker drywall has a higher sound transmission class.[21][citation needed]
Type X drywall

In Type X gypsum board, special glass fibers are intermixed with the gypsum to reinforce the core of the panels. These fibers have the effect of reducing the size of the cracks that form as the water is driven off, thereby extending the length of time the gypsum panels resist fire without failure.[18]
Type C drywall

Type C gypsum panels provide even greater fire resistance than Type X. As with the Type X panels, the core of the Type C panels contains glass fibers, only in a much higher percent by weight. In addition to the greater amount of glass fiber, the core of the Type C panels also contains vermiculite, which acts as a shrinkage-compensating additive that expands when exposed to elevated temperatures of a fire. This expansion occurs at roughly the same temperature as the calcination of the gypsum in the core. It allows the core of the Type C panels to remain dimensionally stable in the presence of fire, which in turn allows the panels to remain in place for a longer period of time even after the combined water has been driven off.[18]
North American market

North America is one of the largest gypsum board users in the world with a total wallboard plant capacity of 42,000,000,000 square feet (3.9×109 m2) per year (worldwide 85,000,000,000 square feet (7.9×109 m2) per year).[22] Moreover, the homebuilding and remodeling markets in North America in the late 1990s and early 2000s increased demand. The gypsum board market was one of the biggest beneficiaries of the housing boom as "an average new American home contains more than 7.31 metric tons of gypsum."[23]

The introduction in March 2005 of the Clean Air Interstate Rule by the United States Environmental Protection Agency requires power plants to "cut sulfur dioxide emissions by 73%" by 2018.[24] The Clean Air Interstate Rule also requested that the power plants install new scrubbers (industrial pollution control devices) to remove sulfur dioxide present in the output waste gas. Scrubbers use the technique of flue-gas desulfurization (FGD), which produces synthetic gypsum as a usable by-product. In response to the new supply of this raw material, the gypsum board market was predicted to shift significantly. However, issues such as mercury release during calcining need to be resolved.[25]
Types available in the US and Canada

    Regular white board, from 1/4" to 3/4" thickness
    Fire-resistant ("Type X"), different thickness and multiple layers of wallboard provide increased fire rating based on the time a specific wall assembly can withstand a standardized fire test. Often perlite, vermiculite, and boric acid are added to improve fire resistance.
    Greenboard, the drywall that contains an oil-based additive in the green colored paper covering that provides moisture resistance. It is commonly used in wash rooms and other areas expected to experience elevated levels of humidity.[26]
    Blueboard, blue face paper forms a strong bond with a skim coat or a built-up plaster finish providing both water and mold resistance.
    Cement board, which is more water-resistant than greenboard, for use in showers or sauna rooms, and as a base for ceramic tile.
    Soundboard is made from wood fibers to increase the sound transmission class.
    Soundproof drywall is a laminated drywall made with gypsum and other materials such as damping polymers to significantly increase the sound transmission class rating.
    Mold-resistant, paperless drywall.[27]
    Enviroboard, a board made from recycled agricultural materials
    Lead-lined drywall, a drywall used around radiological equipment.[28]
    Foil-backed drywall used as a vapor barrier.[29]
    Controlled density (CD), also called ceiling board, which is available only in 1/2" thickness and is significantly stiffer than regular white board.
    EcoRock, a drywall that uses a combination of 20 materials including recycled fly ash, slag, kiln dust and fillers and no starch cellulose; it is advertised as being environmentally friendly due to the use of recycled materials and an energy efficient process.[30]
    Gypsum "Firecode C". This board is similar in composition to Type X, except for more glass fibres and a form of vermiculite, used to reduce shrinkage. When exposed to high heat, the gypsum core shrinks but this additive expands at about the same rate, so the gypsum core is more stable in a fire, and remains in place even after the gypsum dries up.

Waste
Further information: Gypsum recycling

Because up to 12% of drywall is wasted during the manufacturing and installation processes and the drywall material is frequently not re-used, disposal can become a problem. Some landfill sites have banned the dumping of drywall. Some manufacturers take back waste wallboard from construction sites and recycle it into new wallboard. Recycled paper is typically used during manufacturing. More recently, recycling at the construction site itself is being researched. There is potential for using crushed drywall to amend certain soils at building sites, such as sodic clay and silt mixtures (bay mud), as well as using it in compost.[31] As of 2016, industry standards are being developed to ensure that when and if wallboard is taken back for recycling, quality and composition are maintained.
See also

    BPB
    Certification mark
    Chinese drywall
    Clay panel
    Compartmentalization (engineering)
    Construction
    Endothermic
    Fire protection
    Firewall (construction)
    Fermacell
    Homasote
    Knockdown texture
    Magnesium oxide wallboard
    Product certification
    QuietRock
    Saint-Gobain
    United States Gypsum Corporation (USG)

References

"Definition of PLASTERBOARD". www.merriam-webster.com. Archived from the original on 2015-02-18.
"Preservation Brief 21: Repairing Historic Flat Plaster-Walls and Ceilings". Nps.gov. Archived from the original on 2014-04-28. Retrieved 2014-05-31.
"Archived copy". Archived from the original on 2009-07-08. Retrieved 2009-07-15. Gypsum Association History of Gypsum Board
Powell, Jane, and Linda Svendsen. Bungalow details: interior. Salt Lake City: Gibbs Smith, 2006. Print. 53-54.
"Drywall". DrywallTips.org. Retrieved 2010-12-03.
"Repairing Historic Flat Plaster Walls and Ceilings By The Old House Web". Oldhouseweb.com. Archived from the original on 2013-04-16. Retrieved 2013-04-20.
"European Commission - PRESS RELEASES - Press release - Commission imposes heavy fines on four companies involved in plasterboard cartel". europa.eu. Archived from the original on 2015-12-22. Retrieved 2016-03-28.
Global Gypsum Magazine, January 2009, p. 18
"Gypsum (FGD) Explored - Coal Combustion By-Products (CCBs) - calcium sulphate hydrate, scrubber sludge, FGD gypsum, synthetic gypsum - Kentucky Ash Education Site - UK CAER". Caer.uky.edu. 2013-04-12. Archived from the original on 2013-08-01. Retrieved 2013-04-20.
"Page Not Found! - Energy & Environmental Research Center". www.undeerc.org. Archived from the original on 2012-01-16.
Hegger, Manfred. Construction materials manual l. Basel: Birdhouse ;, 2006. Print. 60.
Taonga, New Zealand Ministry for Culture and Heritage Te Manatu. "Fixing Gibraltar board". www.teara.govt.nz. Archived from the original on 2014-08-10.
Ballou, Glen. Handbook for sound engineers. 3rd ed. Boston: Focal, 2002. Print. 73-77.
Lindeburg, Michael R. Mechanical engineering reference manual for the pe exam. S.l.: Professional Publications, 2013. Print. Table 73.6 p. 73-10.
Ballou, Glen. Handbook for sound engineers. 3rd ed. Boston: Focal, 2002. Print. 75-76.
"What is Greenboard Drywall". Homerenovations.about.com. 2013-02-05. Archived from the original on 2013-04-14. Retrieved 2013-04-20.
"Thousands of U.S. Homeowners Cite Drywall for Ills" Archived 2017-03-19 at the Wayback Machine. article by Leslie Wayne in The New York Times October 7, 2009
"Archived copy" (PDF). Archived (PDF) from the original on 2016-12-22. Retrieved 2016-12-20.
USG Corporation. The gypsum construction handbook. 7th ed. Kingston, MA: R. S. Means ;, 2014. Print.
Performance of wood stud shear walls exposed to fire Archived June 11, 2011, at the Wayback Machine.
"Magnesium Oxide Board? - Mgo Board Suppliers Uk and Europe". mgoboard.org. Archived from the original on 2017-12-06. Retrieved 2017-03-31.
"Mineral Commodity Summaries, January 2006" (PDF). Archived (PDF) from the original on 2013-03-16. Retrieved 2013-04-20.
Donald W. Olson (2002) Gypsum Archived 2006-06-14 at the Wayback Machine. History and production
"Clean Air Interstate Rule". Epa.gov. Archived from the original on 2013-04-12. Retrieved 2013-04-20.
"Mercury Release from FGD Gypsum" (PDF). Archived (PDF) from the original on 2012-09-03. Retrieved 2013-04-20.
"Plasterboard | Gyproc Moisture Resistant | Saint-Gobain Gyproc Products". Saint-gobaingyproc.in. Archived from the original on 2011-05-29. Retrieved 2013-04-20.
Ferguson, Myron R.. Drywall: professional techniques for great results. Rev. and updated. ed. Newtown, CT: Taunton Press, 2002. Print. 11.
X-ray shielding. Washington, D.C.: Headquarters, Dept. of the Army, 1966. Print. 12.
Ferguson, Myron R.. Drywall: professional techniques for great results. Rev. and updated. ed. Newtown, CT: Taunton Press, 2002. Print. 15.
Serious Materials EcoRock Archived 2012-10-05 at the Wayback Machine.. Popular Science.

    "Recycled Inerts". Web.archive.org. Archived from the original on November 20, 2009. Retrieved 2013-04-20.

External links
	Wikimedia Commons has media related to Drywall.

    www.drywall-how-to.com

Categories:

    Composite materialsBuilding materialsPassive fire protectionWallcoverings

Navigation menu

    Not logged in
    Talk
    Contributions
    Create account
    Log in

    Article
    Talk

    Read
    Edit
    View history

Search

    Main page
    Contents
    Featured content
    Current events
    Random article
    Donate to Wikipedia
    Wikipedia store

Interaction

    Help
    About Wikipedia
    Community portal
    Recent changes
    Contact page

Tools

    What links here
    Related changes
    Upload file
    Special pages
    Permanent link
    Page information
    Wikidata item
    Cite this page

Print/export

    Create a book
    Download as PDF
    Printable version

In other projects

    Wikimedia Commons

Languages

    Deutsch
    Español
    Français
    Italiano
    日本語
    Português
    Русский
    Tiếng Việt
    中文

Edit links

    This page was last edited on 17 March 2018, at 21:42.
    Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.

    Privacy policy
    About Wikipedia
    Disclaimers
    Contact Wikipedia
    Developers
    Cookie statement
    Mobile view
    Enable previews

    Wikimedia Foundation	
    Powered by MediaWiki	

Carlos Almaraz
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Carlos Almaraz, December 1979
Carlos Almaraz (October 5, 1941 – December 11, 1989) was a Mexican-American artist and an early proponent of the Chicano street arts movement.

Contents 
1	Childhood and education
2	Career
3	See also
4	References
5	External links
Childhood and education
Almaraz was born in Mexico City, but his family moved when he was a young child, settling in Chicago, Illinois, where his father owned a restaurant for five years and worked in Gary steel mills for another four. The neighborhood Almaraz and his brother were raised in was multicultural, which led him to appreciate the melting pot of American culture.[1] During his youth in Chicago, the family traveled to Mexico City frequently, where Almaraz reports having his "first impression of art" that "was both horrifying and absolutely magical", in other words "Sublime". A painting of John the Baptist in the Mexico City cathedral appeared as a gorilla to his young eye and frightened him, but it also taught him "that art can be something almost alive." When Almaraz was nine his family moved to Los Angeles on a doctor's recommendation that his father seek a warm climate to assuage his rheumatism, and also as a result of family problems, first settling in Wilmington, later moving to the then-rural Chatsworth, where they lived in communal housing with other Mexicans.[1] The family then relocated to a Mexican "colony" of the nearly-all-white Beverly Hills, and still later to the barrio of East Los Angeles. Almaraz's interest in the arts, nascent in Chicago, blossomed after his family moved to California, and the sense of mobility developed after so many moves later allowed him to connect with migrant farmworkers and their children. He graduated from Garfield High School in 1959 and attended Los Angeles City College, studying under David Ramirez, and took summer classes at Loyola Marymount University. Loyola offered him a full scholarship, but he declined it in protest of the University's support of the Vietnam War and stopped professing the Catholic faith altogether. He attended California State University, Los Angeles but became discouraged by the structure of the art department there, "because there was no place for an artist." While at CSULA, Almaraz began attending night courses at the Otis College of Art and Design, then known as Otis Art Institute, studying under Joe Mugnaini.[1]

Almaraz studied arts at UCLA. In 1974, he earned an MFA from the Otis Art Institute (now known as Otis College of Art and Design).

Career

A sketch of Carlos Almaraz holding a child. Carlos Almaraz, 1976 . Carlos Almaraz and Elsa Flores papers, Archives of American Art, Smithsonian Institution.
In 1961, Almaraz moved to New York city, with Dan Guerrero, the son of Lalo Guerrero. He left after six months to take advantage of a scholarship offered him by Otis Art Institute. He returned to New York and lived there from 1966 to 1969, where he struggled as a painter in the middle of the new wave movements of the era.

While in New York, he also wrote poetry and philosophy. Almaraz's poems and philosophical views have been published in fifty books.

After returning to California, Almaraz almost died in 1971, and was given the last rites. It has been said that he had an experience with God during his convalescence.[2] By 1972, he was already involved with Cesar Chavez and the United Farm Workers (UFW).[3] In 1973, he was one of four artists who formed the influential artist collective known as Los Four. In 1974, Judithe Hernández, who was a friend and classmate from graduate school at Otis Art Institute became the fifth member and the only woman in Los Four.[4] With the addition of Hernández, the collective exhibited and created public art together for the next decade and have been credited with bringing Chicano art to the attention of mainstream American art institutions. He also painted for Luis Valdez's Teatro Campesino.[1] Some of his murals are heavily influenced by the actos from Teatro Campesino.[3]

His "Echo Park" series of paintings, named after a Los Angeles park of the same name, became known worldwide and have been displayed in many museums internationally. On November 12, 1978, Almaraz wrote "Because love is not found in Echo Park, I'll go where it is found". While Almaraz may not have found love at Echo Park, he certainly found inspiration to produce paintings there: he lived close to the park, having a clear view of the park from his apartment's window.[1]

Another of Almaraz's works, named "Boycott Gallo", became a cultural landmark in the community of East Los Angeles.[1] During the late 1980s, however, "Boycott Gallo" was brought down.

Almaraz was married to Elsa Flores, Chicana activist and photographer. Together, the pair produced "California Dreamscape". He exhibited his work at the Jan Turner Gallery starting in the mid-1980s in Los Angeles through his passing.

Carlos Almaraz died in 1989 of AIDS-related causes. He is remembered as an artist who used his talent to bring critical attention to the early Chicano Art Movement, as well as a supporter of Cesar Chávez and the UFW. His work continues to enjoy popularity. In 1992 the Los Angeles County Museum of Art honored him with a tribute featuring 28 of his drawings and prints donated by his widow.[5] Flores continues to represent his estate. An exhibition of his paintings, pastels, and drawings from the 70s and 80s opened in September 2011, in conjunction with the Getty Research Institute's "Pacific Standard Time: Art in LA 1945-1980". Almaraz will also be featured in corresponding "Pacific Standard Time" exhibitions, including “MEX/LA: Mexican Modernism(s) in Los Angeles 1930-1985” at the Museum of Latin American Art, “Mapping Another L.A.: The Chicano Art Movement” at the Fowler Museum.[6] His and Flores's papers are preserved at the Smithsonian.[7]

See also
List of notable Chicanos
References
 "Oral history interview with Carlos Almaraz, 1986 Feb. 6-1987 Jan. 29, Archives of American Art, Smithsonian Institution". Retrieved 29 July 2011.
 "artscenecal.com Carlos Almarez page". Retrieved 29 July 2011.
 Barnet-Sanchez, Holly (2012). "Radical Mestizaje in Chicano/a Murals". In Anreus, Alejandro; Folgarait, Leonard; Greeley, Robin Adele Greeley. Mexican Muralism: A Critical History. Berkeley, California: University of California Press. pp. 254–256. ISBN 9780520271616.
 "Oral history interview with Judithe Hernández, 1998 Mar. 28, Archives of American Art, Smithsonian Institution". Retrieved 13 August 2011.
 Snow, Shauna (1 April 1992). "LACMA Sets Tribute to Carlos Almaraz : Art: The upcoming showcase features 28 drawings and prints donated by the artist's widow, plus two of his major paintings. The exhibition opens in June". Los Angeles Times.
 http://pacificstandardtime.org/exhibitions
 "Carlos Almaraz and Elsa Flores papers, 1946-1996". Retrieved 29 July 2011.
External links
artscenecal.com
Almaraz in the permanent collection at LACMA
Art of Aztlan Gallery
Print Retrospective Exhibition
Archives of American Art

Carlos Almaraz and Elsa Flores papers, 1946-1996
Transcript of interview with Almaraz
[hide] v t e
Chicano and Mexican American topics
Terms	
Chicano Hispanic La Raza Hispanic and Latino Americans Mexican American Tejanos Californios Nuevomexicanos
Pre-Chicano Movement	
History of Mexican Americans Mexican–American War Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo Mexican Repatriation Sleepy Lagoon trial Zoot Suit Riots
Chicano Movement	
Aztlán Católicos por La Raza Chicanismo Chicana feminism Chicano Blowouts Chicano Moratorium PCUN Plan Espiritual de Aztlán Plan de Santa Bárbara Farm workers rights campaign Land grant struggle Colegio César Chávez
Supreme Court cases	
Botiller v. Dominguez Hernandez v. Texas San Antonio I.S.D. v. Rodriguez Espinoza v. Farah Manufacturing Co. U.S. v. Brignoni-Ponce Plyler v. Doe Medellín v. Texas Flores-Figueroa v. U.S. Leal Garcia v. Texas Mendez v. Westminster Bernal v. Fainter
Culture	
Chicano films Chicano literature Chicano poetry Chicano rock Chicano rap Mexican muralism Skull art Teatro Campesino Tortilla art Chicano Park Estrada Courts murals Cholo Pachuco Paño Tejano music Tex-Mex cuisine Zoot suit Lowrider
By city	
Arizona (Tucson) California (Los Angeles) Illinois (Chicago) Michigan (Detroit) Nebraska (Omaha) Texas Dallas-Fort Worth Houston
Lists	
Caló Chicano poets U.S. communities with Hispanic majority Mexican Americans Writers List of Hispanic and Latino Americans Bibliography
Category:American people of Mexican descent Category:Mexican-American organizations
Authority control	
WorldCat Identities VIAF: 95777860 LCCN: n79071847 GND: 102302103X ULAN: 500015785 RKD: 103293
Categories: 1941 births1989 deaths20th-century American paintersAmerican male paintersAmerican paintersPainters from CaliforniaAmerican artists of Mexican descentMexican emigrants to the United StatesAIDS-related deaths in IllinoisLos Angeles City College alumniCalifornia State University, Los Angeles alumniUCLA School of the Arts and Architecture alumniLoyola Marymount University alumniArtists from Mexico CityArtists from ChicagoFormer Roman CatholicsPeople from Echo Park, Los AngelesOtis College of Art and Design alumniChicano
Navigation menu
Not logged inTalkContributionsCreate accountLog inArticleTalkReadEditView historySearch

Search Wikipedia
Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article
Donate to Wikipedia
Wikipedia store
Interaction
Help
About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact page
Tools
What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Permanent link
Page information
Wikidata item
Cite this page
Print/export
Create a book
Download as PDF
Printable version

Languages
Add links
This page was last edited on 13 March 2018, at 15:59.
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
Privacy policyAbout WikipediaDisclaimersContact WikipediaDevelopersCookie statementMobile viewEnable previews
Wikimedia Foundation Powered by MediaWiki

Gerald Edelman
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
Gerald Edelman
Professor Gerald M. Edelman (cropped).jpg
Gerald M. Edelman in 2010.
Born	Gerald Maurice Edelman
July 1, 1929
Ozone Park, Queens, New York
Died	May 17, 2014 (aged 84)
La Jolla, California
Nationality	American
Alma mater	Ursinus College, University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine, The Rockefeller University
Spouse(s)	Maxine M. Morrison (m. 1950; 3 children)
Awards	Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine in 1972
Scientific career
Fields	Immunology
Neuroscience
Philosophy of Mind
Gerald Maurice Edelman (/ˈɛdəlmən/; July 1, 1929 – May 17, 2014) was an American biologist who shared the 1972 Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine for work with Rodney Robert Porter on the immune system.[1] Edelman's Nobel Prize-winning research concerned discovery of the structure of antibody molecules.[2] In interviews, he has said that the way the components of the immune system evolve over the life of the individual is analogous to the way the components of the brain evolve in a lifetime. There is a continuity in this way between his work on the immune system, for which he won the Nobel Prize, and his later work in neuroscience and in philosophy of mind.

Contents 
1	Early life
2	Career
3	Nobel Prize
3.1	Disulfide bonds
3.2	Molecular models of antibody structure
3.3	Antibody sequencing
3.4	Topobiology
4	Theory of consciousness
4.1	Neural Darwinism
5	Evolution theory
5.1	Later career
6	Personal
6.1	Health and death
7	Bibliography
8	See also
9	References
10	Further reading
11	External links
Early life
Gerald Edelman was born in 1929[3] in Ozone Park, Queens, New York, to Jewish parents, physician Edward Edelman, and Anna (née Freedman) Edelman, who worked in the insurance industry.[4] He studied violin for years, but eventually realized that he did not have the inner drive needed to pursue a career as a concert violinist, and decided to go into medical research instead.[5] He attended public schools in New York, graduating from John Adams High School,[6] and going on to college in Pennsylvania where he graduated magna cum laude with a B.S. from Ursinus College in 1950 and received an M.D. from the University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine in 1954.[4]

Career
After a year at the Johnson Foundation for Medical Physics, Edelman became a resident at the Massachusetts General Hospital; he then practiced medicine in France while serving with US Army Medical Corps.[4] In 1957, Edelman joined the Rockefeller Institute for Medical Research as a graduate fellow, working in the laboratory of Henry Kunkel and receiving a Ph.D. in 1960.[4] The institute made him the Assistant (later Associate) Dean of Graduate Studies; he became a professor at the school in 1966.[4] In 1992, he moved to California and became a professor of neurobiology at The Scripps Research Institute.[7]

After his Nobel prize award, Edelman began research into the regulation of primary cellular processes, particularly the control of cell growth and the development of multi-celled organisms, focussing on cell-to-cell interactions in early embryonic development and in the formation and function of the nervous system. These studies led to the discovery of cell adhesion molecules (CAMs), which guide the fundamental processes that help an animal achieve its shape and form, and by which nervous systems are built. One of the most significant discoveries made in this research is that the precursor gene for the neural cell adhesion molecule gave rise in evolution to the entire molecular system of adaptive immunity.[8]

Nobel Prize
While in Paris serving in the Army, Edelman read a book that sparked his interest in antibodies.[9] He decided that, since the book said so little about antibodies, he would investigate them further upon returning to the United States, which led him to study physical chemistry for his 1960 Ph.D.[9] Research by Edelman and his colleagues and Rodney Robert Porter in the early 1960s produced fundamental breakthroughs in the understanding of the antibody's chemical structure, opening a door for further study.[10] For this work, Edelman and Porter shared the Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine in 1972.[1]

In its Nobel Prize press release in 1972, the Karolinska Institutet lauded Edelman and Porter's work as a major breakthrough:

“	"The impact of Edelman's and Porter's discoveries is explained by the fact that they provided a clear picture of the structure and mode of action of a group of biologically particularly important substances. By this they laid a firm foundation for truly rational research, something that was previously largely lacking in immunology. Their discoveries represent clearly a break-through that immediately incited a fervent research activity the whole world over, in all fields of immunological science, yielding results of practical value for clinical diagnostics and therapy.[11]	”
Disulfide bonds

Diagram illustrating the disulfide bonds (red) that link the light (green) and heavy (blue) protein subunits of Immunoglobulin G (IgG)molecules. This diagram also illustrates the relative positions of the variable (V) and constant (C) domains of an IgG molecule. The heavy and light chain variable regions come together to form antigen binding sites at the end of the two symmetrical arms of the antibody.
Edelman's early research on the structure of antibody proteins revealed that disulfide bonds link together the protein subunits.[2] The protein subunits of antibodies are of two types, the larger heavy chains and the smaller light chains. Two light and two heavy chains are linked together by disulfide bonds to form a functional antibody.

Molecular models of antibody structure
Using experimental data from his own research and the work of others, Edelman developed molecular models of antibody proteins.[12] A key feature of these models included the idea that the antigen binding domains of antibodies (Fab) include amino acids from both the light and heavy protein subunits. The inter-chain disulfide bonds help bring together the two parts of the antigen binding domain.

Antibody sequencing
Edelman and his colleagues used cyanogen bromide and proteases to fragment the antibody protein subunits into smaller pieces that could be analyzed for determination of their amino acid sequence.[13][14] At the time when the first complete antibody sequence was determined (1969)[15] it was the largest complete protein sequence that had ever been determined. The availability of amino acid sequences of antibody proteins allowed recognition of the fact that the body can produce many different antibody proteins with similar antibody constant regions and divergent antibody variable regions.

Topobiology
Topobiology is Edelman’s theory which asserts that morphogenesis is driven by differential adhesive interactions among heterogeneous cell populations and it explains how a single cell can give rise to a complex multi-cellular organism. As proposed by Edelman in 1988, topobiology is the process that sculpts and maintains differentiated tissues and is acquired by the energetically favored segregation of cells through heterologous cellular interactions.

Theory of consciousness
See also: Secondary consciousness
In his later career, Edelman was noted for his theory of consciousness, documented in a trilogy of technical books and in several subsequent books written for a general audience, including Bright Air, Brilliant Fire (1992),[16][17] A Universe of Consciousness (2001, with Giulio Tononi), Wider than the Sky (2004) and Second Nature: Brain Science and Human Knowledge (2007).

In Second Nature Edelman defines human consciousness as:

"... what you lose on entering a dreamless deep sleep ... deep anesthesia or coma ... what you regain after emerging from these states. [The] experience of a unitary scene composed variably of sensory responses ... memories ... situatedness ... "
The first of Edelman's technical books, The Mindful Brain (1978),[18] develops his theory of Neural Darwinism, which is built around the idea of plasticity in the neural network in response to the environment. The second book, Topobiology (1988),[19] proposes a theory of how the original neuronal network of a newborn's brain is established during development of the embryo. The Remembered Present (1990)[20] contains an extended exposition of his theory of consciousness.

In his books, Edelman proposed a biological theory of consciousness, based on his studies of the immune system. He explicitly located his theory within Charles Darwin's Theory of Natural Selection, citing the key tenets of Darwin's population theory, which postulates that individual variation within species provides the basis for the natural selection that eventually leads to the evolution of new species.[21] He explicitly rejected dualism and also dismissed newer hypotheses such as the so-called 'computational' model of consciousness, which liken the brain's functions to the operations of a computer. Edelman argued that the mind and consciousness are purely biological phenomena, arising from complex cellular processes within the brain, and that the development of consciousness and intelligence can be explained by Darwinian theory.

Edelman's theory seeks to explain consciousness in terms of the morphology of the brain. A newborn baby's brain comprises a massive population of neurons (approx. 100 billion cells) and those that survive the initial phases of growth and development will make approximately 100 trillion connections with each other. A sample of brain tissue the size of a match head contains about a billion connections, and if we consider how these neuronal connections might be variously combined, the number of possible permutations becomes hyper-astronomical - in the order of ten followed by millions of zeros.[22] The young brain contains many more neurons than will ultimately survive to maturity, and Edelman argued that this redundant capacity is needed because neurons are the only cells in the body that cannot be renewed and because only those cells and networks best adapted to their ultimate purpose will be selected as they organize into neuronal groups.

Neural Darwinism
Edelman's theory of neuronal group selection, also known as Neural Darwinism, has three basic tenets—Developmental Selection, Experiential Selection and Reentry.

Developmental selection -- the formation of the gross anatomy of the brain is controlled by genetic factors, but in any individual the connectivity between neurons at the synaptic level and their organisation into functional neuronal groups is determined by somatic selection during growth and development. This process generates tremendous variability in the neural circuitry—like the fingerprint or the iris, no two people will have precisely the same synaptic structures in any comparable area of brain tissue. Their high degree of functional plasticity and the extraordinary density of their interconnections enables neuronal groups to self-organise into many complex and adaptable "modules." These are made up of many different types of neurons which are typically more closely and densely connected to each other than they are to neurons in other groups.
Experiential selection -- Overlapping the initial growth and development of the brain, and extending throughout an individual's life, a continuous process of synaptic selection occurs within the diverse repertoires of neuronal groups. This process may strengthen or weaken the connections between groups of neurons and it is constrained by value signals that arise from the activity of the ascending systems of the brain, which are continually modified by successful output. Experiential selection generates dynamic systems that can 'map' complex spatio-temporal events from the sensory organs, body systems and other neuronal groups in the brain onto other selected neuronal groups. Edelman argues that this dynamic selective process is directly analogous to the processes of selection that act on populations of individuals in species, and he also points out that this functional plasticity is imperative, since not even the vast coding capability of entire human genome is sufficient to explicitly specify the astronomically complex synaptic structures of the developing brain.[23]
Reentry
Main article: Reentry (neural circuitry)
—the third tenet of Edelman's thesis is the concept of reentrant signalling between neuronal groups. He defines reentry as the ongoing recursive dynamic interchange of signals that occurs in parallel between brain maps, and which continuously interrelates these maps to each other in time and space (film clip: Edelman demonstrates spontaneous group formation among neurons with re-entrant connections[24]). Reentry depends for its operations on the intricate networks of massively parallel reciprocal connections within and between neuronal groups, which arise through the processes of developmental and experiential selection outlined above. Edelman describes reentry as "a form of ongoing higher-order selection ... that appears to be unique to animal brains" and that "there is no other object in the known universe so completely distinguished by reentrant circuitry as the human brain."
Evolution theory
Edelman and Gally were the first to point out the pervasiveness of degeneracy in biological systems and the fundamental role that degeneracy plays in facilitating evolution.[25]

Later career
Edelman founded and directed The Neurosciences Institute, a nonprofit research center in San Diego that between 1993 and 2012 studied the biological bases of higher brain function in humans. He served on the scientific board of the World Knowledge Dialogue project.[26]

Edelman was a member of the USA Science and Engineering Festival's Advisory Board.[27]

Personal
Edelman married Maxine M. Morrison in 1950.[4] They have two sons, Eric, a visual artist in New York City, and David, an adjunct professor of neuroscience at University of San Diego. Their daughter, Judith Edelman, is a bluegrass musician, recording artist, and writer. Some observers[who?] have noted that a character in Richard Powers' The Echo Maker may be a nod at Edelman.

Health and death
Later in his life, he had prostate cancer and Parkinson's disease.[28] Edelman died on May 17, 2014 in La Jolla, California, aged 84.[3][29][30]

Bibliography
Neural Darwinism: The Theory of Neuronal Group Selection (Basic Books, New York 1987). ISBN 0-19-286089-5
Topobiology: An Introduction to Molecular Embryology (Basic Books, 1988, Reissue edition 1993) ISBN 0-465-08653-5
The Remembered Present: A Biological Theory of Consciousness (Basic Books, New York 1990). ISBN 0-465-06910-X
Bright Air, Brilliant Fire: On the Matter of the Mind (Basic Books, 1992, Reprint edition 1993). ISBN 0-465-00764-3
The Brain, Edelman and Jean-Pierre Changeux, editors, (Transaction Publishers, 2000). ISBN 0-7658-0717-3
A Universe of Consciousness: How Matter Becomes Imagination, Edelman and Giulio Tononi, coauthors, (Basic Books, 2000, Reprint edition 2001). ISBN 0-465-01377-5
Wider than the Sky: The Phenomenal Gift of Consciousness (Yale Univ. Press 2004) ISBN 0-300-10229-1
Second Nature: Brain Science and Human Knowledge (Yale University Press 2006) ISBN 0-300-12039-7
See also
Biologically inspired computing
Embodied philosophy
Embodied cognition
Reentry (neural circuitry)
List of Jewish Nobel laureates
References
 "The Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine 1972". Retrieved 2007-09-27.
 Structural differences among antibodies of different specificities Archived 2006-05-08 at the Wayback Machine. by G. M. Edelman, B. Benacerraf, Z. Ovary and M. D. Poulik in Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (1961) volume 47, pages 1751-1758.
 Rutishauser, Urs (2014). "Gerald Edelman (1929–2014) Biologist who won Nobel for solving antibody structure". Nature. 510 (7506): 474. Bibcode:2014Natur.510..474R. doi:10.1038/510474a. PMID 24965643.
 Odelberg, Wilhelm, ed. (1973). "Gerald M. Edelman: Biography". Les Prix Nobel en 1972. Nobel Foundation. Retrieved 2007-09-27. (Including Addendum, May 2005.)
 Edelman's remarks in 2008 radio interview with physicist Michio Kaku (host of Exploration).
 Ravo, Nick (7 January 1987). "Attention Bewilders Queens High School". New York Times.
 "Gerald M. Edelman: Curriculum Vitae" (PDF). Retrieved 2007-09-27.
 Nobelprize.org - Gerald M. Edelman biography
 "Frontiers Profile: Gerry Edelman". 2000-11-21. Retrieved 2007-09-27.
 "The Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine 1972" (Press release). Karolinksa Institutet. October 1972. Retrieved 2007-09-27. Their discoveries represent clearly a break-through that immediately incited a fervent research activity the whole world over [...]
 Kaarolinska Institutet press release, October 1972
 Edelman, G.; Gally, J. (1964). "A Model for the 7S Antibody Molecule". Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America. 51 (5): 846–853. Bibcode:1964PNAS...51..846E. doi:10.1073/pnas.51.5.846. PMC 300172 Freely accessible. PMID 14173001.
 Cummingham, B.; Gottlieb, P.; Konigsberg, W.; Edelman, G. (1968). "The covalent structure of a human gamma G-immunoglobulin. V. Partial amino acid sequence of the light chain". Biochemistry. 7 (5): 1983–1994. doi:10.1021/bi00845a049. PMID 5650389.
 Gottlieb, P. D.; Cunningham, B. A.; Waxdal, M. J.; Konigsberg, W. H.; Edelman, G. M. (1968). "Variable regions of heavy and light polypeptide chains of the same gammaG-immunoglobulin molecule". Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America. 61 (1): 168–175. Bibcode:1968PNAS...61..168G. doi:10.1073/pnas.61.1.168. PMC 285919 Freely accessible. PMID 4177258.
 Edelman, G. M.; Cunningham, B. A.; Gall, W. E.; Gottlieb, P. D.; Rutishauser, U.; Waxdal, M. J. (1969). "The covalent structure of an entire gammaG immunoglobulin molecule". Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America. 63 (1): 78–85. Bibcode:1969PNAS...63...78E. doi:10.1073/pnas.63.1.78. PMC 534037 Freely accessible. PMID 5257969.
 Tauber, Alfred I. (19 November 1992). "Review of Bright Air, Brilliant Fire: On the matter of the mind by Gerald M. Edelman". N Engl J Med. 327 (21): 1535–1536. doi:10.1056/NEJM199211193272119.
 "Review of Bright Air, Brilliant Fire: On the Matter of the Mind by Gerald Edelman". Kirkus Reviews. 20 April 1992.
 Gerald M. Edelman (1978). The Mindful Brain: Cortical Organization and the Group-selective Theory of Higher Brain Function. MIT Press. ISBN 9780262050203.
 Gerald M. Edelman (1988). Topobiology: An Introduction to Molecular Embryology. Basic Books. ISBN 9780465086344.
 Gerald M. Edelman (1989). The Remembered Present: A Biological Theory of Consciousness. Basic Books. ISBN 9780465069101.
 Gerald M. Edelman, Jean-Pierre Changeux (2001). The Brain. Transaction Publishers. p. 45.
 Gerald Edelman (1992). Bright Air, Brilliant Fire. Penguin. p. 17.
 Gerald Edelman, Bright Air, Brilliant Fire (Penguin, 1992), p.224
 Gerald Edelman: "From Brain Dynamics to Consciousness: A Prelude to the Future of Brain-Based Devices", Video, IBM Lecture on Cognitive Computing, June 2006
 Edelman and Gally (2001). "Degeneracy and complexity in biological systems". Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, USA. 98 (24): 13763–13768. Bibcode:2001PNAS...9813763E. doi:10.1073/pnas.231499798.
 "World Knowledge Dialogue". Retrieved 2007-10-12.
 "Archived copy". Archived from the original on 2010-04-21. Retrieved 2015-02-23.
 "Gerald M. Edelman, Nobel Laureate and 'Neural Darwinist,' Dies at 84". The New York Times.com. May 23, 2014. Retrieved May 23, 2014.
 "Gerald Edelman, Nobel laureate dies". U-T San Diego.com. May 20, 2014. Retrieved May 21, 2014.
 [1]
Further reading
Smoliar, Stephen W (1994), "Review of G.M. Edelman (book review)", in William J. Clancey; Stephen W. Smoliar; Mark Stefik, Contemplating minds: a forum for artificial intelligence, Massachusetts: Massachusetts Institute of Technology, pp. 431–446, ISBN 0-262-53119-4, retrieved 21 May 2010 (originally published in Artificial Intelligence 39 (1989) 121-139.)
External links
Gerald Edelman telling his life story at Web Of Stories
The Scripps Research Institute - Faculty: Gerald Edelman
Nobel Prize biography[permanent dead link]
"Evolution in Your Brain: Gerald Edelman says only the fittest neurons survive" Interview in Discover Magazine, July 2007
"The Brain Doctor: Dr. Gerald Edelman is a Genius on a Spiritual Path"- Profile in San Diego Jewish Journal, October 2007
"From Brain Dynamics to Consciousness", Video, IBM Lecture on Cognitive Computing, June 2006, inactive as of
Jeffrey Epstein VI FoundationJune 15, 2013.
[show] v t e
Laureates of the Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine
[show] v t e
Eli Lilly Award in Biological Chemistry
Authority control	
WorldCat Identities VIAF: 91374131 LCCN: n84075979 ISNI: 0000 0000 8163 9762 GND: 115442553 SELIBR: 184442 SUDOC: 030692008 BNF: cb12205705n (data) NDL: 00465976 NKC: nlk20000083420 BNE: XX1322094 SNAC: w61k2r36
Categories: American immunologistsAntibodiesEmbryologistsAmerican neuroscientistsConsciousness researchers and theoristsAmerican physical chemistsJewish American scientistsAmerican Nobel laureatesNobel laureates in Physiology or MedicineAmerican science writers20th-century American writers21st-century American writersMembers of the United States National Academy of SciencesMembers of the French Academy of SciencesScripps Research Institute facultyRockefeller University facultyPerelman School of Medicine at the University of Pennsylvania alumniUrsinus College alumniUnited States Army Medical Corps officersPeople from Queens, New York1929 births2014 deaths
Navigation menu
Not logged inTalkContributionsCreate accountLog inArticleTalkReadEditView historySearch

Search Wikipedia
Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article
Donate to Wikipedia
Wikipedia store
Interaction
Help
About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact page
Tools
What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Permanent link
Page information
Wikidata item
Cite this page
Print/export
Create a book
Download as PDF
Printable version
In other projects
Wikimedia Commons

Languages
العربية
Deutsch
Español
Français
한국어
Italiano
Русский
اردو
中文
36 more
Edit links
This page was last edited on 9 February 2018, at 22:19.
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
Privacy policyAbout WikipediaDisclaimersContact WikipediaDevelopersCookie statementMobile viewEnable previews
Wikimedia Foundation Powered by MediaWiki

Scollay Square
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Scollay Square, Boston, 19th century (after September 1880)

Scollay Square, Decoration Day, 19th century (after September 1880)
Scollay Square (c. 1838-1962) was a vibrant city square in downtown Boston, Massachusetts. It was named for William Scollay, a prominent local developer and militia officer who bought a landmark four-story merchant building at the intersection of Cambridge and Court Streets in 1795. Local citizens began to refer to the intersection as Scollay's Square, and, in 1838, the city officially memorialized the intersection as Scollay Square. Early on, the area was a busy center of commerce, including daguerreotypist (photographer) Josiah Johnson Hawes (1808–1901) and Dr. William Thomas Green Morton, the first dentist to use ether as an anaesthetic.

As early as the 1950s city officials had been mulling plans to completely tear the Square down and redevelop the area. Eventually more than 1,000 buildings were demolished and 20,000 residents were displaced. With $40 million in federal funds, the city built an entirely new development there, Government Center.

Contents 
1	History
1.1	Culture
1.2	Abolitionism
1.3	Destruction and redevelopment
2	References in popular culture
3	See also
4	References
5	Further reading
6	External links
History

Detail of 1888 map of Boston, showing vicinity of Scollay Square
Scollay Square was located "at the junction of Tremont and Court streets, Cornhill and Tremont Row." Initially the city designated it Pemberton Square, but changed the name to "Scollay Square" when Phillips Square changed its own name to "Pemberton Square." The building that gave the area its name, Scollay's Building, was the last remnant of a once-larger group of buildings: "at one time a wedge-shaped row of wooden buildings, extending from the head of Cornhill to opposite the head of Hanover street, separated Tremont row from Court street (see Bonner's map, 1722); at the southeasterly end the second schoolhouse in the town was erected, 1683-84; at various times portions of these buildings were removed, leaving only the Scollay brick building, supposed to have been built by Patrick Jeffrey, who came into possession in 1795; named for William Scollay, an apothecary... removed about 1870."[1]

Culture
Old Howard Theatre
Among the most famous (and infamous) of Scollay Square landmarks was the Old Howard Theatre, a grand theater which began life as the headquarters of a Millerite Adventist Christian sect which believed the world would end in October 1844. After the world failed to end on schedule, the building was sold in 1844 and reopened as a vaudeville and Shakespearean venue. Later, in the 1900s and 1910s, it would showcase the popular minstrel shows.[2]

By around the 1940s the Scollay Square area began to lose its vibrant commercial activity, and the Howard gradually changed its image and began to cater to sailors on leave and college students by including burlesque shows, as did other nearby venues such as the Casino Theater and Crawford House. "Always Something Doing" became the Old Howard's advertising slogan. The venue also showcased boxing matches with boxers including Rocky Marciano,[3] and continued to feature slapstick vaudeville acts, from likes of The Marx Brothers and Abbott and Costello.[4]

But it was the success and prominence of the burlesque shows that brought the Old Howard down. In 1953, vice squad agents sneaked a home movie camera into the Old Howard, and caught Mary Goodneighbor on film doing her striptease for the audience. The film led to the closure of the theater, and it remained closed until it caught fire mysteriously in 1961.

The square was also the home of Austin and Stone's Dime Museum.


Scollay Square, Boston, after September 1880
John Winthrop Statue
To mark the 250th anniversary of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts, the sculptor Richard Saltonstall Greenough was commissioned to create a bronze sculpture of John Winthrop, the first Governor of the state. The statue was installed in September 1880.

Abolitionism
Scollay Square was also a flashpoint for the early abolition movement. Author William Lloyd Garrison was twice attacked by an angry mob for printing his anti-slavery newspaper The Liberator, which began publication in 1831. Sarah Parker Remond's first act of civil disobedience occurred in 1853 at the Old Howard when she was refused the seat she had purchased but was instead seated in the 'black' section. Many of the buildings in the area in and around Scollay Square had hidden spaces where escaped slaves were hidden, as part of the Underground Railroad.


Militia tries to maintain order in Scollay Square during the 1919 Boston Police Strike
Destruction and redevelopment
As early as the 1950s, city officials had been mulling plans to completely tear down and redevelop the Scollay Square area, in order to remove lower-income residents and troubled businesses from the aging and seedy district. Attempts to reopen the sullied Old Howard by its old performers had been one of the last efforts against redevelopment; but with the theater gutted by fire, a city wrecking ball began the project of demolishing more than 1,000 buildings in the area; 20,000 residents were displaced.

The city offered to give any demolished materials to anyone who could load and take away a full dump truck load. The materials included street paving blocks (Belgian blocks quarried in Quincy), granite, lintels, and bricks.

With $40 million in federal funds, the city built an entirely new development on top of old Scollay Square, renaming the area Government Center, and peppering it with city, state, and federal government buildings: Boston City Hall, City Hall Plaza, Government Service Center, and the Edward W. Brooke Courthouse.

References in popular culture
Pearl Schiff's best-selling 1952 novel, Scollay Square, tells the story of a young woman's affair with a sailor she met in a Scollay Square tavern. The book was considered scandalous at the time.[5]
Jack Kerouac's 1957 novel, On The Road, tells the story of protagonist Sal Paradise's booze fueled night at a Scollay Square tavern.[6]
In the Kingston Trio song "M.T.A." (written by Jacqueline Steiner and Bess Lomax Hawes), Charlie's wife goes down to the Scollay Square station every day, at a quarter past two, to hand her stranded husband a sandwich through the open window. The same scene is repeated with different characters in scenery set about 40 years later in the Dropkick Murphys song "Skinhead on the MBTA".[7]
Sam Savage's 2006 novel Firmin, a magical-realist account of a literate Rat, takes place in Scollay Square at the time of its destruction.
In the game Fallout 4, one of the towns the player can visit is modeled after Scollay Square and is named Goodneighbor after Mary Goodneighbor, who was filmed by local authorities in 1953 doing a striptease at the Old Howard Theatre.[8]
See also
Edward J. Logue, Boston Redevelopment Authority, c. 1962
William Scollay
Combat Zone, Boston
References
 Boston Street Laying-Out Dept. A record of the streets, alleys, places, etc. in the city of Boston. City of Boston Printing Dept., 1910; p.414.
 A Brief History of Scollay Square. http://www.bambinomusical.com/Scollay/History.html
 Kruh, David. "Old Howard". Retrieved 28 March 2015.
 Kruh, David (1999). Always Something Doing: Boston's Infamous Scollay Square. UPNE. p. 60,71. ISBN 9781555534103.
 Long, Tom (30 July 2005). "Pearl Schiff: Novelist Depicted Hub Night Life". The Boston Globe. (Subscription required (help)).
 Baker, Matthew (30 March 2012). "Jack Kerouac: Off The Road, At Last". Boston Magazine. (Subscription required (help)).
 Charlie on the MTA History and Lyrics. http://www.mit.edu/people/jdreed/t/charlie.html
 https://news.google.com/newspapers?nid=2294&dat=19531206&id=Ms4mAAAAIBAJ&sjid=jAIGAAAAIBAJ&pg=928,4803848&hl=en
Further reading
David Kruh. Always something doing: Boston's infamous Scollay Square, rev. ed. UPNE, 1999.
David Kruh. Scollay Square. Arcadia Publishing, 2004.
Daniel A. Gilbert. "Why Dwell on a Lurid Memory?": Deviance and Redevelopment in Boston's Scollay Square. The Massachusetts Historical Review, Vol. 9, (2007), pp. 103–133.
External links
	Wikimedia Commons has media related to Scollay Square.
http://www.joeandnemo.com The Scollay Square Web Site
https://www.flickr.com/photos/boston_public_library/2350725919/ Scollay's Building, 19th century
https://www.flickr.com/photos/boston_public_library/2350724709/ Scollay's building, 19th century
http://www.thehenryford.org/exhibits/dpc/history/billboard1.asp Henry Ford advertisement, c. 1900
https://www.flickr.com/photos/sargent/249104349/ Aerial photo, 1946
https://www.flickr.com/photos/mit-libraries/tags/scollaysquarebostonma Photos by Nishan Bichajian, 1950s
http://www.boston.com/news/local/articles/2009/04/09/once_a_relic_of_the_past_earthy_art_form_sees_a_revival/ Burlesque revival, 2009
Coordinates: 42°21′34″N 71°03′34″W

Categories: Former buildings and structures in BostonSquares in BostonUnderground Railroad locationsFinancial District, Boston19th century in BostonGovernment Center, Boston
Navigation menu
Not logged inTalkContributionsCreate accountLog inArticleTalkReadEditView historySearch

Search Wikipedia
Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article
Donate to Wikipedia
Wikipedia store
Interaction
Help
About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact page
Tools
What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Permanent link
Page information
Wikidata item
Cite this page
Print/export
Create a book
Download as PDF
Printable version
In other projects
Wikimedia Commons

Languages
Cebuano
Edit links
This page was last edited on 3 December 2017, at 22:13.
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
Privacy policyAbout WikipediaDisclaimersContact WikipediaDevelopersCookie statementMobile viewEnable previews
Wikimedia Foundation Powered by MediaWiki

The Comic Strip (TV series)
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
This article is about the animated series. For other uses, see Comic strip (disambiguation).

This article possibly contains original research. Please improve it by verifying the claims made and adding inline citations. Statements consisting only of original research should be removed. (December 2012) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)
The Comic Strip
Starring	Bob McFadden
Larry Kenney
Maggie Wheeler (credited as Maggie Jakobson)
Music by	Bernard Hoffer
Country of origin	United States
Canada
No. of seasons	1
No. of episodes	65
Production
Executive producer(s)	Arthur Rankin, Jr.
Jules Bass
Running time	20 min.
Production company(s)	Rankin/Bass Animated Entertainment
Distributor	Lorimar-Telepictures
Warner Bros. Television Distribution
Release
Original network	Syndicated
Original release	September 7 – December 4, 1987 (first run)
Fall 1988 (repeats)
The Comic Strip is an American animated series which features four rotating cartoon segments. The 90-minute series ran in first-run syndication during the 1987 season and was also seen on RPN-9 in the Philippines, and on Rai 2 in Italy.

Despite the show title, the segments have no history in newspaper comic strips.

This was the last TV series produced by Rankin/Bass Productions, and distributed by Lorimar-Telepictures.

Segments
The four segments offered were:

The Mini-Monsters: Normal human siblings Sherman (Seth Green) and Melissa find themselves in for a surprise when they are sent to summer camp for one year. Camp Mini-Mon turns out to be run by an organ playing shadowy camp director (Peter Newman), and attended by monster kids who are offspring of usually famous monsters, a witch and Merlin. They are Dracky (Dracula's son), Franky (Frankenstein's son), Wolfie (The Wolf Man's son), Gill (the son of The Creature from the Black Lagoon), Mummo (The Mummy's son), Blanko (the Invisible Man's son), Klutz (who may or may not be Godzilla's son), Winifred (a.k.a. Jinx), a witch's daughter (Maggie Wheeler), and Melvin (the son of the wizard Merlin) accompanied by Cawfield, the talking crow (Earl Hammond).
Street Frogs: Depicting the typical teen-aged hijinks of a gang of street-smart frogs named Big Max, Spider, Moose The Loose, "Honey Love" Loretta and Dr. Slick. Each episode contains a musical number. Apart from Rankin-Bass regular Bob McFadden, this segment featured an African-American cast including Ron Taylor.
Karate Kat: Starring a crime-fighting cat. Similar to Hong Kong Phooey and long before SWAT Kats: The Radical Squadron, this show takes place in a world inhabited by anthropomorphic cats.
TigerSharks: About a group of powered up human/marine hybrids who became involved in underwater adventures. Each episode consisted of two parts.
Typically, two segments, each running about 10 minutes, were shown on each broadcast.

Video releases
VHS releases of certain episodes of The Comic Strip were made available in 1987. These VHS tapes each featured three installments of one particular cartoon. For example, the video "Adventures at Camp Mini-Mon" contained three episodes: "Camp Mini-Mon The First Day", "The Belly Ache" and "Alien."

To date, there have been no DVD or digital releases of this series worldwide.

External links
The Comic Strip Opening & Closing on YouTube
TigerSharks Episode 1 on YouTube
TigerSharks Episode 2 on YouTube
The Comic Strip (TV series) on IMDb
The Comic Strip (TV series) at the Big Cartoon DataBase
The Comic Strip at TV.com
[show] v t e
Rankin/Bass Productions
[show] v t e
Animated television series created for syndication
Categories: American animation anthology seriesAmerican children's animated fantasy television seriesFirst-run syndicated television programs in the United States1987 American television series debuts1987 American television series endings1980s American animated television seriesTelevision series by Lorimar TelevisionTelevision series by Warner Bros. TelevisionRankin/Bass Productions television series
Navigation menu
Not logged inTalkContributionsCreate accountLog inArticleTalkReadEditView historySearch

Search Wikipedia
Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article
Donate to Wikipedia
Wikipedia store
Interaction
Help
About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact page
Tools
What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Permanent link
Page information
Wikidata item
Cite this page
Print/export
Create a book
Download as PDF
Printable version

Languages
Add links
This page was last edited on 31 January 2018, at 04:42.
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
Privacy policyAbout WikipediaDisclaimersContact WikipediaDevelopersCookie statementMobile viewEnable previews
Wikimedia Foundation Powered by MediaWiki

Brighton and Hove city centre
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

This article has multiple issues. Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page. (Learn how and when to remove these template messages)
This article does not cite any sources. (January 2009)
This article possibly contains original research. (January 2009)
Brighton and Hove city centre
EmbassyCourtSky.jpg
Embassy Court, city centre
Unitary authority	
Brighton and Hove
Ceremonial county	
East Sussex
Region	
South East
Country	England
Sovereign state	United Kingdom
Post town	BRIGHTON
Postcode district	BN1
Dialling code	01273
Police	Sussex
Fire	East Sussex
Ambulance	South East Coast
EU Parliament	South East England
List of places UK England East Sussex
Brighton and Hove City Centre is the commercial and cultural centre of the city of Brighton. Geographically, the so-called city centre is located in an easterly part of the Brighton and Hove urban conurbation.

Contents 
1	Culture
2	Shopping
3	Amusements
4	Transport
5	Accommodation
6	See also
Culture

The Royal Pavilion

The Pavilion Theatre
The North Laine area has a network of streets dubbed the 'Cultural Quarter', so called because of its concentration of theatres, galleries and small venues. This area covers New Road, the location of the Theatre Royal, and the Brighton Dome complex which includes the Pavilion Theatre, Corn Exchange Theatre and the Dome Concert Hall. Next to this is Brighton Museum and Art Gallery. Bordering New Road and the Dome is Pavilion Gardens which is home to the Royal Pavilion, former palace residence of King George IV. Opposite New Road is Jubilee Street, a modern redevelopment containing restaurant and cafe chains. It is also the location of the Jubilee Library, the city's central library.

On the seafront is the Fishing Museum and near Brighton railway station is the Brighton Toy and Model Museum. The Old Steine and St. Peter's area is a large patch of green in the city centre which is the location of a war memorial, the Frankish St. Peter's Church and two art galleries: the Phoenix Gallery and the University of Brighton gallery.

Shopping

Weekend shoppers flock to the city centre during the day.
Brighton is home to hundreds of shops and is renowned[citation needed] for its wealth of independent shops. Most of the chain stores can be found on Western Road and Churchill Square. The other major high streets are West Street, Queens Road, North Street, East Street, Duke Street and Ship Street.

The Lanes are the centre of Brighton's old town and consist of narrow streets and alleyways. The area is home to lots of jewellery and antique shops.

North of the Lanes is the North Laine, both a residential and major commercial area, and the location of most of the city's independent shops. The commercial area of North Laine is centred on Trafalgar Street, Sydney Street, Gloucester Road, Kensington Gardens, North Road, Gardner Street, Church Street and Bond Street. The area is also home to small art galleries and Komedia, a theatre, bar, comedy venue and cinema. The area is also home to Jubilee Square, home of Jubilee library and a number of restaurants.

A little more east of the main high streets is Kemptown, home to many gay shops and other businesses. Its main shopping thoroughfare is St. James' Street, which has many cafés and restaurants, such as The Saint restaurant and Redroaster Coffee House.

Amusements

Brighton Pier at sunset
Brighton Pier (or, the Palace Pier) is home to many rides and other amusements such as fortune tellers and prize winning games. Near the pier is Brighton Sea Life centre, an aquarium. Near the aquarium is Volks Electric Railway, a historic electric railway, providing transportation to Brighton Marina. West Street is the city's centre for nightlife as home to a number of night clubs and late-night bars.

Transport
Main article: Transport in Brighton and Hove

Brighton railway station

Brighton and Hove Buses run regularly throughout the city centre
The city centre is well served by public transport. Brighton and Hove Buses run regularly throughout the area with stops and stations at Churchill Square, Brighton Station, the Clock Tower, North Street and the Old Steine. Buses serve as the main mode of public transport in Brighton and Hove connecting all suburbs and outer areas to the city centre.

There are major taxi ranks located in Brighton Station and East Street.

Near the Old Steine is Pool Valley Coach Station which is used for intercity travel.

Brighton Railway station serves as the city's main rail terminus and has good links to London, Gatwick Airport and the south coast. Hove railway station serves the centre of Hove and can be reached from Brighton in less than five minutes. London Road Station is near Preston Circus. The rail network in Brighton and Hove is not as extensive as the bus network, however certain suburbs and university campus are well connected to the centre of Brighton and Hove by rail.

Accommodation

The Grand Hotel, Brighton
There are numerous hotels in the city centre, some of the more notable ones include The Grand Hotel, the Hilton Metropole Hotel, the Royal Albion Hotel and the Ramada Hotel.

See also
Brighton
Hove
Brighton and Hove
[hide] v t e
City of Brighton and Hove
Topics	
History Brighton Blitz Brighton in fiction Brighton in film Cemeteries and crematoria Conservation areas LGBT community Libraries Notable people Schools Sewers Transport
Events	
Battle of Lewes Road Trunk murders Beaching of Athina B Grand Hotel bombing
Culture	
Artists Open Houses Brighton Festival Brighton Fringe The Great Escape Brighton Photo Biennial Brighton Marathon Brighton Half Marathon Brighton Pride Brighton Science Festival Skint Records Brighton Speed Trials London to Brighton events Veteran Car Run
Politics	
City Council Local elections 2003 2007 2011 2015 Brighton, Kemptown Lloyd Russell-Moyle Brighton, Pavilion Caroline Lucas Hove Peter Kyle
Transport	
Roads	
A23 A27 A259 Brighton & Hove Bus and Coach Company The Big Lemon
Railway	
Open stations	
Brighton Preston Park Hove Aldrington Portslade London Road Moulsecoomb Falmer
Closed stations	
Golf Club Halt Hartington Road Holland Road Halt Kemp Town Lewes Road Rowan Halt
Infrastructure	
Brighton railway works Cliftonville Curve London Road viaduct Lovers Walk depot
Other	
Auto rickshaws Daddy Long-Legs Trams Trolleybuses Volk's Railway
Media	
Brighton Herald (defunct) Brighton Voice BBC Sussex Heart Sussex Juice 107.2 Radio Reverb The Argus SchNEWS
Sport	
Football	
Brighton & Hove Albion F.C. Brighton & Hove Albion W.F.C. Brighton United F.C. Mile Oak F.C. Saltdean United F.C. Whitehawk F.C. Goldstone Ground Withdean Stadium Falmer Stadium Brighton, Worthing & District Football League
Cricket	
Sussex C.C.C Brighton & Hove C.C. County Cricket Ground
Rugby Union	
Brighton F.C. Hove Rugby Club
Other	
Brighton & Hove Greyhound Stadium Brighton Bears Brighton Racecourse Brighton Rockers Roller Derby Brighton Tigers
Buildings and
architects	
Buildings and architecture Places of worship Demolished places of worship Grade I listed buildings Grade II* listed buildings Landmarks Charles Busby John Nash Amon Henry Wilds Amon Wilds
Parks	
Hove Park Old Steine Gardens Preston Park Queen's Park St Ann's Well Gardens Stanmer Park Wild Park (Brighton Parks Police)
Areas	
Aldrington Balsdean (lost village) Bear Road/Coombe Road Bevendean Black Rock Brighton Brighton Marina Brunswick Town Carlton Hill City centre Coldean Elm Grove Hangleton Hanover Hollingbury Hollingdean Hove Kemp Town Kemptown The Knoll The Lanes Mile Oak Montpelier Moulsecoomb New England Quarter North Laine Old Steine Ovingdean Patcham Portslade-by-Sea Portslade Village Preston Park Preston Village Prestonville Queen's Park Roedean Rottingdean Round Hill Saltdean Seven Dials Stanmer Stanmer Park West Blatchington West Hill Westdene Whitehawk Withdean Woodingdean
Categories: Brighton and HoveCentral business districts in the United Kingdom
Navigation menu
Not logged inTalkContributionsCreate accountLog inArticleTalkReadEditView historySearch

Search Wikipedia
Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article
Donate to Wikipedia
Wikipedia store
Interaction
Help
About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact page
Tools
What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Permanent link
Page information
Wikidata item
Cite this page
Print/export
Create a book
Download as PDF
Printable version

Languages
Add links
This page was last edited on 15 March 2018, at 22:22.
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
Privacy policyAbout WikipediaDisclaimersContact WikipediaDevelopersCookie statementMobile viewEnable previews
Wikimedia Foundation Powered by MediaWiki

Citipointe Church
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

This article has multiple issues. Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page. (Learn how and when to remove these template messages)
The topic of this article may not meet Wikipedia's notability guidelines for companies and organizations. (June 2009)
This article needs additional citations for verification. (April 2008)
Citipointe Church (formerly Christian Outreach Centre Mansfield) is a Pentecostal Christian church founded in 1974. It is the founding church of the Christian Outreach Centre movement. The founding campus is located in the Brisbane suburb of Mansfield, in Australia.

Contents 
1	History
2	Albums
3	References
4	External links
History
Christian Outreach Centre Mansfield was founded on June 23, 1974 with 25 people. The Christian Outreach Centre movement it started has since grown into an international movement, with almost 1000 churches in 31 countries.[citation needed]

The church's senior pastors are Mark and Leigh Ramsey, who have held the position since September 2000.[1]

Citipointe has six Campuses in Queensland: Citipointe Brisbane (Carindale), Citipointe North (Morayfield), Citipointe West (Durack) and Citipointe Redcliffe (Clontarf), Citipointe Ipswich (located in Yamanto). The most recent campus, Citipointe Pine Rivers, was added in September 2016.[2] Citipointe also has three international campuses: Citipointe NOCO (Northern Colorado, USA), Citipointe Auckland (New Zealand) and Citipointe Bulgaria. The Citipointe Church Brisbane site contains a Day Care Centre, a Primary and Secondary School, a Bible College and a College of Higher Education. There are also sporting facilities, including a skatebowl (the "Godbowl") and a basketball court.[3]

Citipointe Church initiated the Red Frog Crew who provide drug and alcohol free entertainment, medical help and volunteers at schoolies festivals.[4]

In 2006, Citipointe started the She Rescue Home in Cambodia, a place where trafficked and prostituted girls receive counselling, medical attention, education and vocational training.[5]

Albums

This section does not cite any sources. Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (April 2016) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)
Citipointe Live has released several albums including:

King of Me (2004)
Heaven (2005)
Anthem of Our Heart (2006)
You Reign (2007)
Devoted (2008)
Commission My Soul (2009)
Hope Is Erupting (2011)
Higher Wider Deeper: Raw Moments (2012)
Holy Ground (2013)
Wildfire (2014)
Into the Deep (2016)
References
 Citipointe Senior Pastors Archived 2011-07-08 at the Wayback Machine.
 http://citipointe.church/pinerivers/
 Brisbane Facilities Page Archived 2011-08-12 at the Wayback Machine.
 [1]
 Why She Rescue Home Opened
External links
Citipointe
Citipointe Live
Christian Outreach Centre
Coordinates: 27°31′57″S 153°06′50″E

Categories: Churches in BrisbaneChurches in QueenslandEvangelical megachurches in AustraliaReligious organizations established in 1974Pentecostal churches in AustraliaProtestant congregations established in the 20th century
Navigation menu
Not logged inTalkContributionsCreate accountLog inArticleTalkReadEditView historySearch

Search Wikipedia
Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article
Donate to Wikipedia
Wikipedia store
Interaction
Help
About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact page
Tools
What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Permanent link
Page information
Wikidata item
Cite this page
Print/export
Create a book
Download as PDF
Printable version

Languages
Add links
This page was last edited on 25 September 2017, at 01:10.
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
Privacy policyAbout WikipediaDisclaimersContact WikipediaDevelopersCookie statementMobile viewEnable previews
Wikimedia Foundation Powered by MediaWiki

Citipointe Church
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

This article has multiple issues. Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page. (Learn how and when to remove these template messages)
The topic of this article may not meet Wikipedia's notability guidelines for companies and organizations. (June 2009)
This article needs additional citations for verification. (April 2008)
Citipointe Church (formerly Christian Outreach Centre Mansfield) is a Pentecostal Christian church founded in 1974. It is the founding church of the Christian Outreach Centre movement. The founding campus is located in the Brisbane suburb of Mansfield, in Australia.

Contents 
1	History
2	Albums
3	References
4	External links
History
Christian Outreach Centre Mansfield was founded on June 23, 1974 with 25 people. The Christian Outreach Centre movement it started has since grown into an international movement, with almost 1000 churches in 31 countries.[citation needed]

The church's senior pastors are Mark and Leigh Ramsey, who have held the position since September 2000.[1]

Citipointe has six Campuses in Queensland: Citipointe Brisbane (Carindale), Citipointe North (Morayfield), Citipointe West (Durack) and Citipointe Redcliffe (Clontarf), Citipointe Ipswich (located in Yamanto). The most recent campus, Citipointe Pine Rivers, was added in September 2016.[2] Citipointe also has three international campuses: Citipointe NOCO (Northern Colorado, USA), Citipointe Auckland (New Zealand) and Citipointe Bulgaria. The Citipointe Church Brisbane site contains a Day Care Centre, a Primary and Secondary School, a Bible College and a College of Higher Education. There are also sporting facilities, including a skatebowl (the "Godbowl") and a basketball court.[3]

Citipointe Church initiated the Red Frog Crew who provide drug and alcohol free entertainment, medical help and volunteers at schoolies festivals.[4]

In 2006, Citipointe started the She Rescue Home in Cambodia, a place where trafficked and prostituted girls receive counselling, medical attention, education and vocational training.[5]

Albums

This section does not cite any sources. Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (April 2016) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)
Citipointe Live has released several albums including:

King of Me (2004)
Heaven (2005)
Anthem of Our Heart (2006)
You Reign (2007)
Devoted (2008)
Commission My Soul (2009)
Hope Is Erupting (2011)
Higher Wider Deeper: Raw Moments (2012)
Holy Ground (2013)
Wildfire (2014)
Into the Deep (2016)
References
 Citipointe Senior Pastors Archived 2011-07-08 at the Wayback Machine.
 http://citipointe.church/pinerivers/
 Brisbane Facilities Page Archived 2011-08-12 at the Wayback Machine.
 [1]
 Why She Rescue Home Opened
External links
Citipointe
Citipointe Live
Christian Outreach Centre
Coordinates: 27°31′57″S 153°06′50″E

Categories: Churches in BrisbaneChurches in QueenslandEvangelical megachurches in AustraliaReligious organizations established in 1974Pentecostal churches in AustraliaProtestant congregations established in the 20th century
Navigation menu
Not logged inTalkContributionsCreate accountLog inArticleTalkReadEditView historySearch

Search Wikipedia
Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article
Donate to Wikipedia
Wikipedia store
Interaction
Help
About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact page
Tools
What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Permanent link
Page information
Wikidata item
Cite this page
Print/export
Create a book
Download as PDF
Printable version

Languages
Add links
This page was last edited on 25 September 2017, at 01:10.
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
Privacy policyAbout WikipediaDisclaimersContact WikipediaDevelopersCookie statementMobile viewEnable previews
Wikimedia Foundation Powered by MediaWiki

HMCS Long Branch
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
HMCS Long Branch.jpg
HMCS Long Branch
History
Canada
Name:	Long Branch
Namesake:	Long Branch, Ontario
Ordered:	25 July 1942
Builder:	A. & J. Inglis Ltd., Glasgow
Laid down:	27 February 1943
Launched:	28 September 1943
Commissioned:	5 January 1944
Decommissioned:	17 June 1945
Identification:	Pennant number: K487
Honours and
awards:	Atlantic 1944-45[1]
Fate:	Sold in 1947 as mercantile Rexton Kent II. Scuttled off Canada's Atlantic coast in 1966.
General characteristics
Class and type:	Flower-class corvette (modified)
Displacement:	1,015 long tons (1,031 t; 1,137 short tons)
Length:	208 ft (63.40 m)o/a
Beam:	33 ft (10.06 m)
Draught:	11 ft (3.35 m)
Propulsion:	single shaft, 2× oil fired water tube boilers, 1 triple-expansion reciprocating steam engine, 2,750 ihp (2,050 kW)
Speed:	16 knots (29.6 km/h)
Range:	3,500 nautical miles (6,482 km) at 12 knots (22.2 km/h)
Complement:	90
Sensors and
processing systems:	One Type 271 SW2C radar, one Type 144 sonar
Armament:	
1 × 4 in (102 mm) BL Mk.IX single gun
1 × 2-pounder Mk.VIII single "pom-pom"
2 × 20 mm Oerlikon single
1 × Hedgehog A/S mortar
4 × Mk.II depth charge throwers
2 depth charge rails with 70 depth charges
HMCS Long Branch (sometimes spelled as Longbranch) was a modified Flower-class corvette that served in the Royal Canadian Navy during the Second World War. She was used primarily as a convoy escort in the Battle of the Atlantic. She was laid down as HMS Candytuft but was transferred to the RCN on 5 January 1944 before completion.[2] She was named for Long Branch, Ontario, a village that was eventually amalgamated into Toronto, Ontario.

Contents 
1	Background
2	Construction
3	Service history
4	Notes
5	External links
Background
Main article: Flower-class corvette
Flower-class corvettes like Long Branch serving with the Royal Canadian Navy during the Second World War were different from earlier and more traditional sail-driven corvettes.[3][4][5] The "corvette" designation was created by the French as a class of small warships; the Royal Navy borrowed the term for a period but discontinued its use in 1877.[6] During the hurried preparations for war in the late 1930s, Winston Churchill reactivated the corvette class, needing a name for smaller ships used in an escort capacity, in this case based on a whaling ship design.[7] The generic name "flower" was used to designate the class of these ships, which – in the Royal Navy – were named after flowering plants.[8]

Corvettes commissioned by the Royal Canadian Navy during the Second World War were named after communities for the most part, to better represent the people who took part in building them. This idea was put forth by Admiral Percy W. Nelles. Sponsors were commonly associated with the community for which the ship was named. Royal Navy corvettes were designed as open sea escorts, while Canadian corvettes were developed for coastal auxiliary roles which was exemplified by their minesweeping gear. Eventually the Canadian corvettes would be modified to allow them to perform better on the open seas.[9]

Construction
Candytuft was ordered 25 July 1942 as part of the Royal Navy 1942-43 Increased Endurance Flower-class building program. She was laid down 27 February 1943 by A. & J. Inglis Ltd. at Glasgow, Scotland and launched 28 September 1943.[10] As part of an exchange for Algerine-class minesweepers that the RCN intended to use as convoy escorts, the Royal Navy transferred four Flower-class corvettes and twelve Castle-class corvettes to Canada in order to acquire them. Candytuft was transferred on 5 January 1944 and commissioned as HMCS Long Branch into the RCN at Tobermory, Mull. The only significant differences between the RCN and RN 1942-43 Flower classes was a shortened mainmast and varying anti-aircraft armament.[9]

Service history
Upon commissioning to the RCN she was tasked to join Mid-Ocean Escort Force escort group C-5 at Londonderry Port in April 1944 following a one-month work up period at Tobermory. C-5 sailed with the convoy ONS 233. Long Branch developed mechanical problems during the crossing and underwent a six-week repair at the Newfoundland Drydock upon her arrival at St. John's.[2]

She departed St. John's on 14 June to resume duties but returned for further repairs with the assistance of HM Tug Tenacity. Once repaired, she left St. John's a week later to join convoy HXS 300, the largest convoy of the war.[2]

She continued as an ocean escort until her final departure from Londonderry on 27 January 1945. She arrived at Halifax under the command of A/Lt.Cdr. J.B. O'Brien, RCNVR on 11 February and commenced a refit. In April she was assigned to Halifax for local duties.[2]

Long Branch was paid off from the RCN on 17 June 1945 at Sorel, Quebec. She was transferred to the War Assets Corporation and sold for commercial use in 1947. She emerged from the conversion as Rexton Kent II, later renamed Rexton Kent.[11] She was scuttled 5 nautical miles (9.3 km; 5.8 mi) off Cape Spencer, Nova Scotia on 22 February 1966.[2][12]

Notes
 "Battle Honours". Britain's Navy. Retrieved 5 October 2013.
 Macpherson, Ken; Burgess, John (1981). The ships of Canada's naval forces 1910-1981 : a complete pictorial history of Canadian warships. Toronto: Collins. p. 104. ISBN 0-00216-856-1.
 Ossian, Robert. "Complete List of Sailing Vessels". The Pirate King. Retrieved 13 April 2011.
 Fitzsimons, Bernard, ed. (1978). The Illustrated Encyclopedia of 20th Century Weapons & Warfare. 11. London: Phoebus. pp. 1137–1142.
 Jane's Fighting Ships of World War II. New Jersey: Random House. 1996. p. 68. ISBN 0-517-67963-9.
 Blake, Nicholas; Lawrence, Richard (2005). The Illustrated Companion to Nelson's Navy. Stackpole Books. pp. 39–63. ISBN 0-8117-3275-4.
 Chesneau, Roger; Gardiner, Robert (June 1980). Conway's All the World's Fighting Ships (1922-1946). Naval Institute Press. p. 62. ISBN 0-87021-913-8.
 Milner, Marc (1985). North Atlantic Run. Naval Institute Press. pp. 117–119, 142–145, 158, 175–176, 226, 235, 285–291. ISBN 0-87021-450-0.
 Macpherson, Ken; Milner, Marc (1993). Corvettes of the Royal Canadian Navy 1939-1945. St. Catharines: Vanwell Publishing. ISBN 1-55125-052-7.
 "HMCS Long Branch (K 487)". Uboat.net. Retrieved 6 October 2013.
 Colledge, J. J.; Warlow, Ben (2006) [1969]. Ships of the Royal Navy: The Complete Record of all Fighting Ships of the Royal Navy (Rev. ed.). London: Chatham Publishing. ISBN 978-1-86176-281-8. OCLC 67375475.
 "Longbranch (5293626)"Paid subscription required. Miramar Ship Index. Retrieved 15 July 2016.
External links
Hazegray. "Revised Flower Class". Canadian Navy of Yesterday and Today. Retrieved 5 October 2013.
Ready, Aye, Ready. "HMCS Long Branch". Retrieved 5 October 2013.
"HMCS Long Branch (K 487)". Arnold Hague database at convoyweb.org.uk. Retrieved 2008-06-08.
[hide] v t e
Flower-class corvettes
[show]
Original ships
[hide]
Modified ships
 Royal Canadian Navy	
Asbestos Atholl Beauharnois Belleville Brampton Charlottetown Cobourg Fergus Forrest Hill Frontenac Giffard Guelph Hawkesbury Ingersoll Lachute Lindsay Listowel Long Branch Louisburg Meaford Merrittonia Mimico Norsyd North Bay Owen Sound Parry Sound Peterborough Renfrew Riviere du Loup Smiths Falls St. Lambert Stellarton Strathroy Thorlock Trentonian West York Whitby
 Royal Indian Navy	
Assam Gondwana Sind
 Royal Navy	
Arabis Arbutus Balm Betony Buddleia Bugloss Bullrush Burnet Candytuft Ceanothos Charlock Comfrey Cornel Dittany Flax Honesty Linaria Mandrake Milfoil Musk Nepeta Privet Rosebay Smilax Statice Willowherb
 Royal New Zealand Navy	
Arabis Arbutus
 United States Navy
Action class	
Action Alacrity Beacon Brisk Caprice Clash Haste Intensity Might Pert Prudent Splendor Tact Vim Vitality
 Argentine Navy	
Capitán Cánepa República
[show] v t e
Ships built by A. & J. Inglis, Glasgow
[show] v t e
Shipwrecks and maritime incidents in 1966

Categories: Ships of the Royal Canadian Navy1943 shipsFlower-class corvettes of the Royal Canadian NavyShipwrecks of the Nova Scotia coastShips built by Harland and Wolff
Navigation menu
Not logged inTalkContributionsCreate accountLog inArticleTalkReadEditView historySearch

Search Wikipedia
Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article
Donate to Wikipedia
Wikipedia store
Interaction
Help
About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact page
Tools
What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Permanent link
Page information
Wikidata item
Cite this page
Print/export
Create a book
Download as PDF
Printable version

Languages
Slovenščina
Suomi
Edit links
This page was last edited on 25 February 2018, at 19:39.
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
Privacy policyAbout WikipediaDisclaimersContact WikipediaDevelopersCookie statementMobile viewEnable previews
Wikimedia Foundation Powered by MediaWiki

Frankie & Benny's
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
Question book-new.svg
This article relies too much on references to primary sources. Please improve this by adding secondary or tertiary sources. (October 2011) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)
Frankie & Benny's
FrankieAndBennys.svg
Type
New York-Italian 1950s themed restaurant chain
Founded	1995
Headquarters	London, United Kingdom
Number of locations
250+
Owner	The Restaurant Group plc
Website	www.frankieandbennys.com

Typical entrance to a Frankie and Benny's restaurant, in Swindon

Night time appearance of entrance to a Frankie and Benny's restaurant, located at Xscape, Glasgow
Frankie & Benny's is a chain of Italian-American restaurants in the United Kingdom, with numerous outlets nationwide, run by The Restaurant Group plc.[1][2]

The first location opened in 1995 in Leicester,[3] but now the chain has over 190 locations across the UK.[4]

The years 2015 and 2016 proved tough for Frankie & Benny's, as profits slumped. This was blamed on poor management of the company and an unnecessary raise in menu prices. Owners, The Restaurant Group, are currently attempting to reinvent the brand, which introduced a new menu in March 2017.

Contents 
1	Story
2	Controversy
3	References
4	External links
Story
In branches, on menus, and on their official website,[5] the fictional story about the restaurant's origins is presented. The story is that in 1924, at the age of 10, Frankie left Sicily with his parents and moved to “Little Italy” in New York City. Within a year of moving, the family had opened a restaurant, everybody helping with the building and the cooking in equal measure. Frankie went to the nearby high school and became lifelong friends with Benny, already a third-generation American. The business was taken over by Frankie and Benny in 1953, and combines popular American food with traditional Italian dishes.[citation needed]

Controversy
In 2014, a customer complained after he was served a crab dish containing surimi. The item was eventually removed from the menu.[6]

In November 2015 the chain was given the lowest rating (red) in an assessment of the sustainability of its seafood products.[7]

References
 "The Restaurant Group". Retrieved 2011-10-15.
 Negus, Richard. "When trading down is affected by your good covenant." Journal of Retail & Leisure Property 6.1 (2007): 84-91.
 "Caterersearch: The Restaurant Group". Retrieved 2012-09-07.
 "Frankie & Benny's - Find a Restaurant". Retrieved 2012-09-07.
 "Frankie & Benny's". Retrieved 2012-09-07.
 Lawrence, Felicity. "Diner is left shellshocked over crab dish". The Guardian. Retrieved 10 May 2014.
 https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/nov/18/family-restaurant-chains-unsustainable-seafood-wagamama-bella-italia
External links
	Wikimedia Commons has media related to Frankie and Benny's.
FrankieandBennys.com
[hide] v t e
Food chains in the United Kingdom
Casual dining	
Angus Steakhouse Ask Beefeater Grill Belgo Bella Italia Bill's Brewers Fayre Byron Hamburgers Café Rouge Carluccio's Chiquito Côte Damon's Dishoom Ed's Easy Diner Franco Manca Frankie & Benny's Giraffe Gourmet Burger Kitchen Harry Ramsden's Harvester Hungry Horse Jimmy's Restaurants Las Iguanas La Tasca Little Chef Loch Fyne Restaurants Nando's OK Diner Pizza Hut PizzaExpress Prezzo Sticks'n'Sushi Strada Table Table T.G.I. Friday's Toby Carvery Tony Roma's Wagamama Wahaca Wildwood Kitchen Zizzi
Fast food	
Barburrito Burger King Chicken Cottage Chipotle Mexican Grill Dixy Chicken Domino's Pizza Five Guys KFC Leon McDonald's Morley's Papa John's Pizza Sam's Chicken Southern Fried Chicken Square Pie Subway Taco Bell Tops Pizza Tortilla Wasabi Wimpy YO! Sushi
Baked goods	
Auntie Anne's Cinnabon Cooplands Dunkin' Donuts Eat Greggs Krispy Kreme Millie's Cookies Patisserie Valerie Poundbakery Pret a Manger Sayers Spudulike Upper Crust The West Cornwall Pasty Company
Coffee shops and tea rooms	
AMT Coffee Betty's Caffè Nero Caffè Ritazza Coffee #1 Coffee Republic Costa Coffee Harris + Hoole Starbucks
Dairy	
Baskin-Robbins Ben & Jerry's Kaspa's
Pub chains	
All Bar One Chef & Brewer O'Neill's Slug and Lettuce Walkabout Wetherspoons Yates's
Categories: Italian restaurantsRestaurant groups in the United KingdomRestaurants established in 1995
Navigation menu
Not logged inTalkContributionsCreate accountLog inArticleTalkReadEditView historySearch

Search Wikipedia
Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article
Donate to Wikipedia
Wikipedia store
Interaction
Help
About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact page
Tools
What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Permanent link
Page information
Wikidata item
Cite this page
Print/export
Create a book
Download as PDF
Printable version
In other projects
Wikimedia Commons

Languages
Scots
Edit links
This page was last edited on 16 February 2018, at 17:15.
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
Privacy policyAbout WikipediaDisclaimersContact WikipediaDevelopersCookie statementMobile viewEnable previews
Wikimedia Foundation Powered by MediaWiki

Arielle North Olson
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

This biography of a living person needs additional citations for verification. Please help by adding reliable sources. Contentious material about living persons that is unsourced or poorly sourced must be removed immediately, especially if potentially libelous or harmful. (July 2015) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)
Arielle North Olson is an author of children's books.[1]

Contents 
1	Family
2	Writing career
3	References
4	External links
Family
Arielle is the daughter of noted author Sterling North, who wrote Rascal. She is also the niece of author, poet and editor Jessica Nelson North. She is one of the copyright owners of Sterling North's body of work. She now has 3 children and 7 grandchildren, and is a resident of St. Louis, Missouri.

Arielle is from a multi-generation literary family. Arielle's great-grandparents, James Hervey Nelson and Sarah Orelup Nelson, were Wisconsin pioneers. In 1917, which would have been her great-grandfather James Hervey Nelson's 100th birthday, three of her great-uncles, including early Amazon missionary Justus Henry Nelson, wrote extended biographies about their parents and their pioneer farm life. These writing efforts may have been a literary inspiration to both her father Sterling and her aunt Jessica.

Writing career
Arielle has written:

Hurry Home Grandma
Noah's Cats and the Devil's Fire
The Lighthouse Keeper's Daughter
She has edited:

Ask the Bones: Scary Stories from Around the World
More Bones: Scary Stories from Around the World
She also reviewed children's books for the St. Louis Post Dispatch for 26 years.

Her biography is captured in:

Contemporary Authors
References
 Arielle North Olson Missouri Center For The Book
External links
Missouri authors
Mention of her in article about St. Louis' literary legacy
Article about the Centennial Celebration and the naming of Edgerton as "Booktown"
Agenda of the Centennial celebration mentioning her as starting the Opening Ceremony
Sterling North Society newsletter mentioning her several times.
Short bio of her in the Edgerton Bookfest notes
	Children's literature portal
Categories: 20th-century American novelists21st-century American novelistsAmerican children's writersAmerican women novelistsNovelists from MissouriNovelists from WisconsinLiving peopleAmerican women children's writers20th-century American women writers21st-century American women writersWriters from St. Louis
Navigation menu
Not logged inTalkContributionsCreate accountLog inArticleTalkReadEditView historySearch

Search Wikipedia
Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article
Donate to Wikipedia
Wikipedia store
Interaction
Help
About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact page
Tools
What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Permanent link
Page information
Wikidata item
Cite this page
Print/export
Create a book
Download as PDF
Printable version

Languages
Add links
This page was last edited on 10 February 2018, at 22:43.
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
Privacy policyAbout WikipediaDisclaimersContact WikipediaDevelopersCookie statementMobile viewEnable previews
Wikimedia Foundation Powered by MediaWiki

2015 Mubadala World Tennis Championship – Singles
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
Main article: 2015 Mubadala World Tennis Championship

This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (December 2014) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)
Singles
2015 Mubadala World Tennis Championship
Champion	United Kingdom Andy Murray
Runner-up	Serbia Novak Djokovic
Final score	walkover
← 2013 ·	Mubadala World Tennis Championship	· 2016 →
Novak Djokovic was the three-time defending champion and lost the final to Andy Murray by way of a walkover.

Contents 
1	Seeds
2	Draw
2.1	Key
2.2	Draw
2.3	Play-offs
3	References
4	External links
Seeds
Serbia Novak Djokovic (Final, withdrew due to illness)[1]
Spain Rafael Nadal (Semifinals) (Third Place)
Switzerland Stan Wawrinka (Semifinals) (Fourth Place)
United Kingdom Andy Murray (Champion)
Spain Feliciano López (Quarterfinals) (Sixth Place)
Spain Nicolás Almagro (Quarterfinals) (Fifth Place)
Draw
Key
Q = Qualifier
WC = Wild Card
LL = Lucky Loser
Alt = Alternate
SE = Special Exempt
PR = Protected Ranking
w/o = Walkover
r = Retired
d = Defaulted
Draw
Quarterfinals			Semifinals			Final	
 	 	 	 	 			 	 	 	 	 			 	 	 	 	 	
1	Serbia Novak Djokovic	 	 	 	
bye	 	 	 	
1	Serbia Novak Djokovic	6	6		
3	Switzerland Stan Wawrinka	1	2		
3	Switzerland Stan Wawrinka	6	6		
6	Spain Nicolás Almagro	3	2		
1	Serbia Novak Djokovic			 	
4	United Kingdom Andy Murray	w/o		 	
4	United Kingdom Andy Murray	77	5	6		
5	Spain Feliciano López	61	7	4	
4	United Kingdom Andy Murray	6	6				Third Place Match
2	Spain Rafael Nadal	2	0		
 	bye	 	 	 			3	Switzerland Stan Wawrinka	61	3	 
2	Spain Rafael Nadal	 	 	 			2	Spain Rafael Nadal	77	6	 
Play-offs
Fifth Place Match	
 	 	 	 	 	
5	Spain Feliciano López	4	66	 	
6	Spain Nicolás Almagro	6	78	 	
References
 "Novak bolestan, ne igra finale" [Djokovic ill, not Playing in the Finals]. B92. 3 January 2015. Retrieved 3 January 2015.
External links
Categories: World Tennis Championship2015 in Emirati sport
Navigation menu
Not logged inTalkContributionsCreate accountLog inArticleTalkReadEditView historySearch

Search Wikipedia
Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article
Donate to Wikipedia
Wikipedia store
Interaction
Help
About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact page
Tools
What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Permanent link
Page information
Wikidata item
Cite this page
Print/export
Create a book
Download as PDF
Printable version

Languages
Italiano
Edit links
This page was last edited on 27 January 2018, at 23:30.
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
Privacy policyAbout WikipediaDisclaimersContact WikipediaDevelopersCookie statementMobile viewEnable previews
Wikimedia Foundation Powered by MediaWiki

Network-i
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
Network-i
Industry	Cloud computing
Founded	5 June 1996
Headquarters	Slough, England
Area served
EMEA and United States of America
Products	Infrastructure as a service
Website	www.network-i.net
Network-i Ltd is a datacentre company headquartered in Slough, Berkshire, England. The company provides hosting, colocation, network & cloud based services from its datacentres located in the United Kingdom, Europe & the US.

In 2006, the company was the first datacentre operator worldwide to gain ISO 27001:2005 accreditation. Network-i opened a second datacentre in January 2009.

On 5 August 2010 Network-i was acquired by Virtustream a provider of cloud computing management software, infrastructure as a service and managed services to enterprises, governments and service providers.

Datacentres
Network-i operates two ISO 27001 certified carrier-neutral datacentres in the UK, and through its parent company Virtustream an additional two datacentres based in the US & Europe.

Network
Network-i operates its own wide area networks (WAN) both within the UK and the United States.

The company maintains links from each of its UK datacentres to the London Internet Exchange (AKA "LINX") where it offers breakout services to carriers and other datacentres.

Cloud computing and colocation services
Network-i offers traditional Infrastructure as a Service, managed hosting and colocation centre services.

Stub icon	This article about an organisation in England is a stub. You can help Wikipedia by expanding it.
Categories: English organisation stubsCompanies based in SloughBusiness services companies established in 19961996 establishments in England
Navigation menu
Not logged inTalkContributionsCreate accountLog inArticleTalkReadEditView historySearch

Search Wikipedia
Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article
Donate to Wikipedia
Wikipedia store
Interaction
Help
About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact page
Tools
What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Permanent link
Page information
Wikidata item
Cite this page
Print/export
Create a book
Download as PDF
Printable version

Languages
Add links
This page was last edited on 13 July 2015, at 02:35.
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
Privacy policyAbout WikipediaDisclaimersContact WikipediaDevelopersCookie statementMobile viewEnable previews
Wikimedia Foundation Powered by MediaWiki

Christos Mandas
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
Christos Mandas
Personal information
Full name	Christos Mandas
Date of birth	17 September 2001 (age 16)
Place of birth	Piraeus, Greece
Height	1.85 m (6 ft 1 in)
Playing position	Goalkeeper
Club information
Current team
Atromitos F.C.
Number	35
Youth career
Atromitos F.C.
Senior career*
Years	Team	Apps	(Gls)
2017–	Atromitos F.C.	0	(0)
National team‡
2017–	Greece U17	3	(0)
* Senior club appearances and goals counted for the domestic league only and correct as of January 6, 2018.
‡ National team caps and goals correct as of January 6, 2018
Christos Mandas (born 17 September 2001) is a Greek football player who plays as goalkeeper for Superleague Greece club Atromitos F.C..[1]

Career
Atromitos F.C.
On 28 November 2017 Mandas made his professional debut in Greek Football Cup against Sparta F.C..

References
 Christos Mandas at Soccerway
[hide] v t e
Atromitos F.C. – current squad
1 Mirković 4 Bušuladžić 5 Chatziisaias 6 Karasalidis 8 Umbides 9 Manousos 10 Warda 11 Bruno 12 Kotsopoulos 14 Diguiny 15 Madson 16 Vasilakakis 17 Gianniotis 19 Kivrakidis (c) 21 Kyriakidis 23 Sakic 27 Dauda 28 Natsos 29 Stroungis 30 Lazaridis 31 Giannoulis 33 Theodorakis 34 Kinalis 35 Mandas 37 Junior 44 Risvanis Coach: Canadi
Flag of GreeceSoccer icon	This biographical article relating to Greek football is a stub. You can help Wikipedia by expanding it.
Categories: 2001 birthsLiving peopleGreek footballersAtromitos F.C. playersAssociation football goalkeepersGreek football biography stubs
Navigation menu
Not logged inTalkContributionsCreate accountLog inArticleTalkReadEditView historySearch

Search Wikipedia
Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article
Donate to Wikipedia
Wikipedia store
Interaction
Help
About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact page
Tools
What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Permanent link
Page information
Wikidata item
Cite this page
Print/export
Create a book
Download as PDF
Printable version

Languages
Add links
This page was last edited on 6 January 2018, at 11:34.
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
Privacy policyAbout WikipediaDisclaimersContact WikipediaDevelopersCookie statementMobile viewEnable previews
Wikimedia Foundation Powered by MediaWiki

Arno Kozelsky
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
Arno Kozelsky
Arno Kozelsky - SKNV St. Pölten (02).jpg
Personal information
Full name	Arno Kozelsky
Date of birth	November 1, 1981 (age 36)
Place of birth	Liebenfels, Austria
Height	1.85 m (6 ft 1 in)
Playing position	Striker
Club information
Current team
St. Pölten
Number	11
Senior career*
Years	Team	Apps	(Gls)
2001–2002	SVG Bleiburg		
2002–2004	Kärnten	8	(1)
2003–2004	→ Leoben (loan)	29	(5)
2004–2008	Leoben	94	(43)
2008–2011	Kapfenberg	31	(2)
2011–	St. Pölten		
* Senior club appearances and goals counted for the domestic league only and correct as of 13:12, 11 August 2009 (UTC).
Arno Kozelsky (born November 1, 1981) is an Austrian footballer, currently playing for SKN St. Pölten.

Club career
Kozelsky played for lower league sides Liebenfels and Bleiburg before joining Austrian Football Bundesliga outfit FC Kärnten for the second half of the 2002-2003 season. In 2004, he signed for DSV Leoben. He impressed in a trial with Hibernian in May 2007,[1] and joined Hibernian at their pre-season training camp to try to get a contract with the club.[2] After an unsuccessful bid at training camp with Hibernian, he was immediately resigned by Austrian club DSV Leoben in 2007. In summer 2008 he moved to promoted Kapfenberg.

External links
Player profile[permanent dead link] - Kapfenberger SV
References
 "Evans heads in as Kozelsky waits". BBC Sport. 2007-06-20. Retrieved 2007-06-30.
 "Arno joins Hibs training camp to win over Collins". Scotsman. 2007-06-29. Retrieved 2007-06-30.


Flag of AustriaSoccer icon	This biographical article related to association football in Austria, about a forward, is a stub. You can help Wikipedia by expanding it.
Categories: 1981 birthsLiving peopleAssociation football forwardsAustrian footballersFC Kärnten playersAustrian Football Bundesliga playersKapfenberger SV playersAustrian football forward stubs
Navigation menu
Not logged inTalkContributionsCreate accountLog inArticleTalkReadEditView historySearch

Search Wikipedia
Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article
Donate to Wikipedia
Wikipedia store
Interaction
Help
About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact page
Tools
What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Permanent link
Page information
Wikidata item
Cite this page
Print/export
Create a book
Download as PDF
Printable version
In other projects
Wikimedia Commons

Languages
Deutsch
Edit links
This page was last edited on 29 January 2018, at 23:04.
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
Privacy policyAbout WikipediaDisclaimersContact WikipediaDevelopersCookie statementMobile viewEnable previews
Wikimedia Foundation Powered by MediaWiki

Sushil Datta
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

This biography of a living person needs additional citations for verification. Please help by adding reliable sources. Contentious material about living persons that is unsourced or poorly sourced must be removed immediately, especially if potentially libelous or harmful. (September 2012) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)
Sushil Datta
Sushil Datta.jpg
Born	
February 4, 1959 (age 59)
India Kangra, Himachal Pradesh,

India
Occupation	Filmmaker,Writer
Sushil Datta also known as Sushil Datta Sharma (born February 4, 1959)[1] is an Indian filmmaker, writer and film & media teacher based in Mumbai. During his career journey he has extensively worked in both film and television mediums. He has also been associated with some of the country’s top media companies like UTV , Balaji Telefilms , Nimbus Television & Sports and Sudhir Mishra Productions. He is most noted for the feature film, Hazaaron Khwaishein Aisi (2003), where he served as an Executive Producer. In Television, India’s first countdown show “Superhit Muqabla” was also directed by him.

Contents 
1	Early life and education
2	Career
3	Personal life
4	In Development
5	References
Early life and education
Sushil Datta’s childhood was spent at various places in the country owing to his father’s transferrable job as an officer in the Indian Air Force. During this time he developed an interest in theatre and was actively involved as a director / actor in many such small town productions. It was his amateur production of Revti Sharan Sharma’s play “Deepshikha” at University of Jodhpur which firmly made him realize the path which he was to follow in his life.

He kept alive his interest in arts , literature , theatre , and later cinema while supporting himself for his post graduate studies in journalism. The next logical step was joining the AJK, Mass Communication Research Centre at Jamia Millia Islamia (first Batch 1983-1985). During the master's degree course he came close to stalwarts like world-renowned documentary filmmaker James Beveridge and Directors Guild Award Winning/Gemini Nominated Director Michael Kennedy.

Career
While still a student of Jamia, he won a project of three documentaries on social issues from Government of Madhya Pradesh. Soon after he was hired by Studio IFEKT to be the Chief Assistant Director to the acclaimed Series based on actual police cases – Police File Se.

During his stay at Delhi , post Jamia Days he came in close contacts with Late Safdar Hashmi, N.K.Sharma, Madan Gopal Singh and M.K. Raina . It was M.K. Raina whom he started assisting in Television Productions. ‘Zameen’ starring Late Manohar Singh & Uttra Baokar was the first one and was followed by Telefilms like Apne Se Door (Debut Seema Biswas), Nirnay and Hosh. His first independent break came through with the film “Nai Subeh” which he directed for Producer Surinder Singh (of the duo SINGH BANDHU). The film which dealt with the problems of terrorism was widely and critically acclaimed. For the same producer he directed a TV series on devotional music –Gavo Sacchi Baani which featured well known artists like Asha Bhonsle and poet/philosopher Harbhajan Singh.

He has made serials for Doordarshan – Nai Manzilen Nai Rahein and several documentaries and short video advertisements for various departments and ministries. He has also made films in the celluloid format – SAHAR and Swadhikaar for department of Child & Women Welfare.

He was also Director & Segment Producer for Indian Television’s first Cultural Magazine Surabhi (TV series); a series produced by Siddharth Kak for DD National. Before making a move to Mumbai in 1992, he worked with an Italian feature film – Delhi’92 which was directed by Italo Spinelli.

Once in Mumbai he was assigned to direct Nimbus Television’s countdown (dubbed as mother of all countdowns) show – Superhit Muqabla . His association with Nimbus lasted many years where he worked as creative director / supervising producer / executive producer for many of their television shows like NYAY and AGNI. During his tenure at Nimbus he came in close contact with Harish Thawani, Akash Khurana and Sudhir Mishra.

Sushil also Directed a few episodes of Tony & Diya Singh’s popular programmes - Just Mohabbat - one of the most popular youth based series on Sony TV and MAAN - a family drama with Punjabi Culture Backdrop on Channel 9 Gold.

Sudhir Mishra’s critically acclaimed and awarded Hazaaron Khwaishein Aisi (2003) came next where Sushil took on the mantle of Executive Producer. In the first six months the film travelled to twelve film festivals e.g. Turkey, Estonia, River to River (Florence), Berlin, Edinburgh, Washington, Goa, Bite The Mango (Bradford), Commonwealth (Manchester), India (Los Angeles), Dallas, and Pacific Rim (California) where it was equally praised by critics and audience both.

In 2004 the husband wife duo of Himalya & Bhagyashree asked him to take on the dual responsibility of directing and executing the production of their acclaimed TV serial Kagaz Ki Kashtti [2] which ran on Sahara TV for 204 episodes.

Soon after, Sushil joined UTV – United Television Software as Head of Production. During his tenure at UTV he supervised the production of many popular shows like Bhabhi (Star Plus) , Shararat (Star Plus), Kehta Hai Dil (Star Plus), Shakalaka Boom Boom (Star Plus), Meher (DD National) , Cry Telethon (Sony TV) , Special Squad (Star One), Business Bytes – (BBC), Back To Floor (BBC) , Stuntmen of Bollywood – (National Geographic Channel) and many more for Hungama TV.

Apart from being an active film maker, Sushil Datta is also deeply interested in training and teaching new comers to the film and television industry. As a result he was appointed by Balaji Telefilms’ – Institute of Creative excellence as a Subject Matter Expert. Currently he is working as Director of City Pulse Institute of Film and Television where he has directed two short films – Aakhiri Padaav [3] and Nirmal Bharat Abhiyan.

He is a member of 'Film Writers Association' , Mumbai and 'Western India Cinematographers' Association' (W.I.C.A), Mumbai.

He served on the JURY of SHORT FILM FESTIVAL The Unassailable-2014 organized by Kadi Sarva Vishwavidyalaya.[4]

Personal life
He is married and lives in Mumbai with his wife who is a Sculptor (educated at Maharaja Sayajirao University, Baroda & Delhi College of Arts) and Daughter (Paloma Sharma) who is a known, young film critic writing mainly for rediff.com.

In Development
• Teen Deviyaan, Hindi feature film for CPIFT Productions.

• “Rent Shent Te Aunty Kent” – Hindi feature film.

• A biopic documentary on Padma Bhushan Awardee “Poornima Arvind Pakvasa”.

References
 http://www.greatjaipur.com/celebrity-birthday/celebrity-birthday.html
 Kagaz Ki Kashtti' on Sahara TV completes a century | http://www.indiantelevision.org.in/headlines/y2k3/apr/apr38.htm
 Students reach their ‘Aakhiri Padaav’ | http://www.ahmedabadmirror.com/article/16/2013112820131128015505984ba6a47b8/Students-reach-their-%E2%80%98Aakhiri-Padaav%E2%80%99.html
 http://ksvuniversity.org.in/event2014.php
Categories: 1959 birthsLiving people
Navigation menu
Not logged inTalkContributionsCreate accountLog inArticleTalkReadEditView historySearch

Search Wikipedia
Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article
Donate to Wikipedia
Wikipedia store
Interaction
Help
About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact page
Tools
What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Permanent link
Page information
Wikidata item
Cite this page
Print/export
Create a book
Download as PDF
Printable version

Languages
Add links
This page was last edited on 14 January 2017, at 16:01.
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
Privacy policyAbout WikipediaDisclaimersContact WikipediaDevelopersCookie statementMobile viewEnable previews
Wikimedia Foundation Powered by MediaWiki

Gray zone lymphoma
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
Gray zone lymphoma, often presenting as large tumors in the mediastinum, is a type of lymphoma that is characterized by having cellular features of both classic Hodgkin's lymphomas (cHL) and large B-cell lymphomas.

Sources
Traverse-Glehen A, Mediastinal gray zone lymphoma: the missing link between classic Hodgkin's lymphoma and mediastinal large B-cell lymphoma. Am J Surg Pathol 2005 Nov ;29(11):1411-21
Hodgkin’s lymphoma and Grey-zone lymphomas
References


Stub icon	This oncology article is a stub. You can help Wikipedia by expanding it.
Categories: LymphomaOncology stubs
Navigation menu
Not logged inTalkContributionsCreate accountLog inArticleTalkReadEditView historySearch

Search Wikipedia
Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article
Donate to Wikipedia
Wikipedia store
Interaction
Help
About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact page
Tools
What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Permanent link
Page information
Wikidata item
Cite this page
Print/export
Create a book
Download as PDF
Printable version

Languages
Add links
This page was last edited on 3 November 2016, at 21:52.
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
Privacy policyAbout WikipediaDisclaimersContact WikipediaDevelopersCookie statementMobile viewEnable previews
Wikimedia Foundation Powered by MediaWiki

McLeod's Daughters: Songs from the Series Volume 2
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

This article does not cite any sources. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (April 2008) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)
McLeod's Daughters: Songs from the Series Volume 2
McLeod'sDaughtersSongsVol2.jpg
Soundtrack album by Rebecca Lavelle
Released	Australia April 2004
Recorded	2000 - 2004
Genre	Pop
Label	Sony BMG
Producer	Posie Graeme-Evans, Chris Harriot
Rebecca Lavelle chronology
Songs From The Series Vol. 1
(2002)	McLeod's Daughters: Songs from the Series Volume 2
(2004)	McLeod's Daughters: Songs from the Series Volume 3
(2008)
McLeod's Daughters: Songs from the Series Volume 2 is the second album of songs from the soundtrack of Australian television drama McLeod's Daughters released on 25 April 2004 and made the top 40 of the Australian album charts as at 3 May 2004.

Contents 
1	Making of the Soundtrack
2	Track listing
3	See also
4	References
5	External links
Making of the Soundtrack
The songs are written by Posie Graeme-Evans and Chris Harriott and performed by Rebecca Lavelle. Graeme-Evans also writes many of the songs for Hi-5. On the website for the show, Posie Graeme-Evans tells of the songwriting process for the soundtracks.

For me, writing the songs for McLeod's has become an emotional journey into the heart of the series and the characters we've all come to love so much. I'd always thought Chris Harriott and I could use songs as a way to get under the skin of Claire, Tess, Meg, Jodi, Becky, Nick and Alex; almost like tools within an episode, the songs would give voice to what the characters were feeling but could not say. But as Chris and I have developed the songs, they've become much more to me than that: they've become a way of exploring how we all feel, the things we'd all like to say.

— Posie Graeme-Evans
Track listing
"Theme From McLeod's Daughters" (Seasons 1–4 version)
"Hey Girl (You Got A New Life)"
"Take The Rain Away"
"The Stranger"
"Sometimes"
"Too Young"
"The First Touch"
"In His Eyes"
"By My Side"
"Did I Tell You?"
"Don't Give Up"
"Gentle Gentle (Life Of My Life)"
See also
McLeod's Daughters
References
External links
McLeod's Daughters web page
[hide] v t e
McLeod's Daughters
Episodes Drovers
Characters	
Claire McLeod Tess Silverman McLeod Jodi Fountain McLeod Becky Howard Alex Ryan Nick Ryan Stevie Hall Kate Manfredi Marcus Turner
Seasons	
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8
Music	
Songs From The Series: Vol. 1 (2002) Songs From The Series: Vol. 2 (2004) Songs From The Series: Vol. 3 (2008)


Stub icon	This soundtrack-related article is a stub. You can help Wikipedia by expanding it.
Categories: McLeod's Daughters albums2004 soundtracksSoundtrack stubs
Navigation menu
Not logged inTalkContributionsCreate accountLog inArticleTalkReadEditView historySearch

Search Wikipedia
Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article
Donate to Wikipedia
Wikipedia store
Interaction
Help
About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact page
Tools
What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Permanent link
Page information
Wikidata item
Cite this page
Print/export
Create a book
Download as PDF
Printable version

Languages
Add links
This page was last edited on 23 January 2018, at 16:58.
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
Privacy policyAbout WikipediaDisclaimersContact WikipediaDevelopersCookie statementMobile viewEnable previews
Wikimedia Foundation Powered by MediaWiki

Nebraska Highway 67
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
Nebraska Highway 67 marker

Nebraska Highway 67

Nebraska Highway 67 highlighted in red
Route information
Maintained by NDOT
Length	66.49 mi[2] (107.01 km)
Existed	1934[1] – present
Major junctions
South end	 US 73 east of Verdon
 	 US 136 in Brownville
 US 75 in Auburn
 N-2 north of Dunbar
North end	 US 34 southwest of Nehawka
Location
Counties	Richardson, Nemaha, Otoe, Cass
Highway system
Nebraska State Highway System
Interstate US State
Link Spur State Spurs Recreation
←  N-66		N-68  →
Nebraska Highway 67 is a highway in southeastern Nebraska. Its southern terminus is at an intersection with U.S. Highway 73 near Verdon. Its northern terminus is at an intersection with U.S. Highway 34 near Nehawka. The segment between Nebraska Highway 2 and US 34 is one of four segments of road in the Nebraska highway system which is gravel.

Contents 
1	Route description
2	Major intersections
3	References
4	External links
Route description
Nebraska Highway 67 begins at U.S. Highway 73 east of Verdon and proceeds north into farmland. The road meets Nebraska Highway 62 near Shubert and Nebraska Spur 64E, the highway to Indian Cave State Park. It continues north through Nemaha and meets U.S. Highway 136 near Brownville. It turns west there with US 136 and after 3 miles (4.8 km), turns north towards Peru. Near Peru, it turns westward, meets Nebraska Spur 64G, which runs into Peru, home of Peru State College, and continues west until it meets U.S. Highway 75. After a one-mile (1.6 km) concurrency going northward, it continues west, runs through Brock, and meets Nebraska Highway 105. At its intersection with NE 105, it turns north until it meets Nebraska Highway 128. It turns west at NE 128, goes through Lorton and continues north. It runs through Dunbar and meets Nebraska Highway 2 on the north edge of Dunbar. It continues north from there as a gravel road and eventually ends at U.S. Highway 34 southwest of Nehawka.[2][3]

Major intersections
County	Location	mi[2]	km	Destinations	Notes
Richardson	Verdon	0.00	0.00	 US 73	Southern terminus
Shubert	6.02	9.69	 N-62 west	
Indian Cave State Park	8.03	12.92	 S-64E east	
Nemaha	Brownville	17.23	27.73	 US 136 east	South end of US 136 overlap
​	19.83	31.91	 US 136 west (Central Avenue)	West end of US 136 overlap
Peru	25.81	41.54	 S-64G north (644A Avenue)	
​	31.32	50.40	 US 75 south	South end of US 75 overlap
​	32.32	52.01	 US 75 north	North end of US 75 overlap
​	41.57	66.90	 N-105 south	
Otoe	Talmage	45.07	72.53	 S-66D west	
Lorton	49.64	79.89	 N-128 east (N Road)	South end of NE 128 overlap
50.63	81.48	 N-128 west (N Road)	North end of NE 128 overlap
Dunbar	56.17	90.40	 N-2	
Cass	​	66.49	107.01	 US 34 (East O Street)	Northern terminus
1.000 mi = 1.609 km; 1.000 km = 0.621 mi
      Concurrency terminus
References
 The Nebraska Highways Page: Highways 61 to 100
 "Nebraska Highway Reference Log Book" (PDF). Nebraska Department of Roads. 2015. pp. 169–170. Retrieved January 7, 2017.
 Google (2010-11-09). "overview of Nebraska Highway 67" (Map). Google Maps. Google. Retrieved 2010-11-09.
External links
Route map: Google

KML file (edit • help)
Display on Google Maps
Nebraska Roads: NE 61-80
Categories: State highways in NebraskaTransportation in Richardson County, NebraskaTransportation in Nemaha County, NebraskaTransportation in Otoe County, NebraskaTransportation in Cass County, Nebraska
Navigation menu
Not logged inTalkContributionsCreate accountLog inArticleTalkReadEditView historySearch

Search Wikipedia
Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article
Donate to Wikipedia
Wikipedia store
Interaction
Help
About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact page
Tools
What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Permanent link
Page information
Wikidata item
Cite this page
Print/export
Create a book
Download as PDF
Printable version

Languages
Bân-lâm-gú
Español
Edit links
This page was last edited on 28 August 2017, at 00:31.
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
Privacy policyAbout WikipediaDisclaimersContact WikipediaDevelopersCookie statementMobile viewEnable previews
Wikimedia Foundation Powered by MediaWiki

Someshwara Swamy Temple
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
The Someshwara Temple is located in Agara, on Sarjapura main road in Bangalore, India.The Co-Ordinates of this temple are:- 12°55'5"N 77°37'6"E.It is dedicated to the Deity Someshwara (the Hindu God Shiva) and dates back to the Chola period. The temple has a history of 1,200 years.[1]

References
 "A 1200-year-old Shiva Temple".

Categories: Chola architecture9th-century Hindu templesHindu temples in Bangalore
Navigation menu
Not logged inTalkContributionsCreate accountLog inArticleTalkReadEditView historySearch

Search Wikipedia
Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article
Donate to Wikipedia
Wikipedia store
Interaction
Help
About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact page
Tools
What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Permanent link
Page information
Wikidata item
Cite this page
Print/export
Create a book
Download as PDF
Printable version

Languages
Add links
This page was last edited on 27 May 2016, at 06:46.
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
Privacy policyAbout WikipediaDisclaimersContact WikipediaDevelopersCookie statementMobile viewEnable previews
Wikimedia Foundation Powered by MediaWiki

List of atheists in politics and law
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
This list is incomplete; you can help by expanding it.
Main article: Lists of atheists
There have been many atheists who have participated in politics or law. This is a list of atheists in politics and law. Living persons in this list are people whose atheism is relevant to their notable activities or public life, and who have publicly identified themselves as atheists.


Achmat

Beaird

Ben-Gurion

Bradlaugh

Ceaușescu

Clegg

Darrow

Dayan

Desai

Duceppe

Foot

Gomułka

Herzl

Lenin

Hoxha

Machel

Marx

Meir

Miliband

Mujica

Palme

Periyar

Proudhon

Rabin

Romme

Stalin

Stark

Tito

Trotsky

Tsipras

Cimoszewicz

Honecker

Ventura
Contents 
1	Africa
2	Asia
2.1	Afghanistan
2.2	China
2.3	India
2.4	Middle East
2.5	Russia/Soviet Union
2.6	Others in Asia
3	Oceania
3.1	Australia
3.2	New Zealand
4	Europe
4.1	Albania
4.2	Denmark
4.3	Finland
4.4	France
4.5	Germany
4.6	Greece
4.7	Ireland
4.8	Italy
4.9	The Netherlands
4.10	Poland
4.11	Romania
4.12	Spain
4.13	Sweden
4.14	United Kingdom
4.15	Other in Europe
5	North America
5.1	Canada
5.2	Mexico
5.3	United States
6	South America
6.1	Argentina
6.2	Guyana
6.3	Paraguay
6.4	Uruguay
7	Notes and references
Africa
Zackie Achmat (1962–): South African anti-Apartheid activist and HIV campaigner.[1]
Kareem Amer (1984–): Egyptian political activist.
Alex Erwin (1948–): South African politician, the country's Minister of Public Enterprises from 2004 to 2009.[2]
Nadine Gordimer (1923–2014): South African anti-Apartheid political activist.[3]
Maikel Nabil Sanad (1985–): Egyptian political activist.[4]
Joe Slovo (1926–1995): South African Communist politician, leader of the South African Communist Party and leading member of the African National Congress.[5]
Ronnie Kasrils (1938–): South African anti-Apartheid politician.
Richard Leakey (1944–): Kenyan politician, conservationist and paleoanthropologist.[6]
Samora Moisés Machel (1933–1986): Mozambican socialist revolutionary.
Mengistu Haile Mariam (born 1937): Ethiopian politician and military dictator.
Kingunge Ngombale–Mwiru: Tanzanian politician.
Asia
Afghanistan
Nemat Sadat (1979–): Ex-Muslim[7] LGBT Rights Activist,[8] journalist and writer, former professor of American University of Afghanistan[9]
China
Xi Jinping (1953–): General Secretary of the Communist Party of China and President of China.
Jiang Zemin (1926–): Chinese communist politician, General Secretary of the Communist Party of China 1989–2002 and President of China 1993–2003.[10]
Mao Zedong (1893–1976): Chinese military and political leader, Chairman of the Communist Party of China, who led the Communist Party of China to victory in the Chinese Civil War, and was the leader of the People's Republic of China from its establishment in 1949 until his death in 1976. Under his leadership, China officially became an atheist state.[11][12][13]
India
Periyar E. V. Ramasamy, known as Periyar (1879–1973): Social reformer and politician, the 'Socrates of Southern Asia', who founded the Self-Respect Movement and Dravidar Kazhagam.[14]
C. N. Annadurai (1909-1969), known as Arignar Anna (The scholar Anna), Prime Follower of Periyar E. V. R, founder of Dravida Munnetra Kazhagam and the former Chief minister of Tamil Nadu.
Goparaju Ramachandra Rao, Well known as Gora (1902–1975) Social reformer, founded Atheist Centre on the principles of positive Atheism.Participated in Indian freedom movement, preached atheism.
Subhashini Ali (19??–): Marxist politician and President of the All India Democratic Women's Association.[15]
Kanimozhi (1968–): Politician and poet, and daughter of the Tamil Nadu Chief Minister M. Karunanidhi.[16]
M. Karunanidhi (1924–): Ex-Chief Minister of Tamil Nadu.[17][18]
Manabendra Nath Roy (1887–1954): Born Narendra Nath Bhattacharya, popularly known as M. N. Roy, was a Bengali Indian revolutionary, internationally known political theorist and activist, founder of the Communist parties in Mexico and India. He later denounced communism and became an exponent of the philosophy of radical humanism.[19]
Bhagat Singh (1907–1931): Freedom fighter, wrote a pamphlet entitled Why I am an atheist.[20]
Harkishan Singh Surjeet (1916–2008): Politician, General Secretary of the Communist Party of India (Marxist) from 1992 to 2005 and a member of the party's Polit Bureau from 1964 to 2008.[21]
A. K. Gopalan (1904–1977): Communist leader from Kerala and former Leader of the Opposition (India).
E. M. S. Namboodiripad (1909–1998): Politician, renowned socialist and a Marxist theorist, first Chief Minister of Kerala. He also became the leader of the first democratically elected communist government in the world.
Prakash Karat: Politician, The General Secretary of the Communist Party of India (Marxist) from 2005 to 2015.
Siddaramaiah (1948–): Chief Minister of Karnataka elected to office in 2013.[22]
E. K. Nayanar (1918–2004): Politician, former Chief Minister of Kerala [23]
A. K. Antony (1940–): Politician, former Chief Minister of Kerala
V. S. Achuthanandan (1923–): Politician, former Chief Minister of Kerala
Middle East
Uri Avnery (1923–): German-born Israeli journalist, left-wing peace activist, and former Knesset member.[24]
David Ben-Gurion (1886–1973): Polish-Israeli politician; a founder and the first Prime Minister of Israel.[25][26][27][28][29][30][31]
Moshe Dayan (1915–1981): Israeli military leader and politician. The fourth Chief of Staff of the Israel Defense Forces (1953–58). He went on to become Defense Minister and later Foreign Minister of Israel.[26][27]
George Hawi (1938–2005): Lebanese politician and former secretary general of the Lebanese Communist Party.[32]
Golda Meir (1898–1978): Israeli politician who became the fourth Prime Minister of Israel.[27]
Yitzhak Rabin (1922–1995): Israeli politician, statesman and general. He was the fifth Prime Minister of Israel. He won the 1994 Nobel Peace Prize together with Shimon Peres and Yasser Arafat.[33]
Russia/Soviet Union
Vladimir Ilyich Lenin (1870–1924): Marxist revolutionary and leader of the Bolsheviks. Lenin considered atheism and anti-religious propaganda to be essential to promoting communism.[34]
Nikita Khrushchev (1894–1971): Soviet General Secretary, 1953–1964.,[35][36]
Joseph Stalin (1878–1953): General Secretary of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union's Central Committee from 1922 until his death in 1953.[37]
Leon Trotsky (1879–1940): Marxist theorist.[38]
Others in Asia
Xuan Thuy (1912–1985): North Vietnamese political figure, foreign minister for North Vietnam 1963–65, official leader of the delegation to the secret talks with Henry Kissinger, and the main negotiator at the earliest meetings with Kissinger.[39]
Pol Pot (1925-1998): birth name Saloth Sar, Cambodian dictator[40]
Oceania
Australia
Montague Miller (1839–1920): unionist, secularist and revolutionary socialist.[41]
William Trenwith (1846–1925): trade union official and labour movement politician.[42]
Frederick Vosper (1869–1901): newspaper journalist and proprietor, and politician, known for his ardent views and support of Australian republicanism, federalism and trade unionism.[43]
Sir John Latham (1877–1964): Chief Justice of Australia (1935–1952).[44]
Lionel Murphy (1922–1986): Justice of the High Court (1975–1986).[45]
Bill Hayden (1933–): Governor-General of Australia (1989–1996).[46][47]
Alan Carpenter (1957–): Premier of Western Australia (2006–2008).[48]
Julia Gillard (1961–): Prime Minister of Australia (2010–2013).[49][50]
New Zealand
Norman Douglas (1910–1985): Labour Party politician.[51]
Sir Dove-Myer Robinson (1901–1989): Politician, Mayor of Auckland from 1959–1965 and 1968–1980.[52]
Europe
Albania
Ben Blushi (1969–): Politician, former minister, writer and journalist.
Diana Çuli (1951–): Writer, journalist and politician.
Enver Hoxha (1908–1985): Communist ruler who declared Albania the first atheist state, and who has been identified as an "arch-atheist. "[53][54]
Hysen Hoxha (1861–1934) Politician, mayor of Gjirokastër, part of the Gjirokastra delegation for the Assembly of Vlorë.
Denmark
Edvard Brandes (1847–1931): Politician, critic and author, Minister of Finance 1909–1910 and 1913–1920.[55]
Thorvald Stauning (1873–1943): Prime minister 1924–1926 and 1929–1942.
Vilhelm Buhl: Prime minister May–November 1942 and May–November 1945.
Hans Hedtoft: Prime minister 1947–1950 and 1953–55.
H. C. Hansen: Prime minister 1955–1960.
Jens Otto Krag: Prime minister 1962–1968 and 1971–1972.[56]
Finland
Erkki Tuomioja: Politician, Minister of Foreign Affairs 2011–2015
Rosa Meriläinen: Politician and Author
Jussi Halla-aho: Leader of the Finns Party and Member of the European Parliament (MEP)
France
Georges Clemenceau (1841–1929): Statesman, physician and journalist, prime minister of France 1906–1909 and 1917–1920. Led France during World War I and was one of the major proponents of the Treaty of Versailles.[57]
Pierre Joseph Proudhon (1809–1865): Politician, mutualist philosopher and socialist. He was a member of the French Parliament, and he was the first person to call himself an "anarchist".[58]
Gilbert Romme (1750–1795): Politician and mathematician who developed the French Republican Calendar.[59]
Marie-Jean Hérault de Séchelles (1759–1794): 5th and 25th President of the National Convention. First known atheist head of state ever.[60]
François Hollande (1954–): President of France.[61]
Germany
Karl Marx (1818–1883): 19th-century philosopher, political economist, sociologist, political theorist, often called the father of communism.[62]
Kurt Schumacher (1895–1952): Social democratic politician who served as chairman of the Social Democratic Party of Germany from 1946 and was the first Leader of the Opposition in the West German Bundestag from 1949 until his death.[63]
Sahra Wagenknecht (1969–): Left-wing politician (Die Linke)[64]
Erich Honecker (1912-1994): Communist politician and leader of East Germany.
Greece
Alexis Tsipras (1974–): Leader of Syriza and Prime Minister of Greece since 26 January 2015.
Yanis Varoufakis (1961-): Minister of Finance from 27 January 2015 to 6 July 2015.
Ireland
Eamon Gilmore (1955–): Tánaiste (Deputy Prime Minister) and Minister for Foreign Affairs, and leader of the Labour Party.[65][66]
Clare Daly (1968–): United Left Alliance, Teachta Dála[67]
Jim Kemmy (1936–1997): Socialist politician.[68]
Ivana Bacik (1968–): Senator and Deputy Leader of the Seanad[69][70]
Proinsias De Rossa (1940–): Politician, former President of the Workers' Party, leader of Democratic Left, and later a senior member of the Labour Party.[71]
Hanna Sheehy-Skeffington (1877–1946): Suffragist and nationalist.[72]
Owen Sheehy-Skeffington (1909–1970): University lecturer and Senator.[73]
William Thompson (1775–1833): Socialist and economist.[74]
Joe Higgins (1949–): Socialist Party politician. In the 2011 general election he was elected to Dáil Éireann as Teachta Dála (TD) for the Dublin West constituency, having previously served in that capacity from 1997–2007.[1] He was also a Member of the European Parliament (MEP) for the Dublin constituency from 2009 to 2011, the first Socialist Party MEP.[75]
Italy
Giorgio Napolitano (1925–): Politician, 11th President of Italy.
Sandro Pertini (1896–1990): Politician, 7th President of Italy.
Giuseppe Saragat (1898–1988): Politician, 5th President of Italy.
Massimo D'Alema (1949–): Politician, 53rd Prime Minister 1998–2000, Minister of Foreign Affairs and Deputy Prime Minister in the Prodi II Cabinet 2006–2008.
Giuliano Ferrara (1952–): Politician, journalist, and occasional talk show host.[76]
Nilde Iotti (1920–1999): Politician, the first woman to become president of the Italian Chamber of Deputies for three consecutive legislatures 1979–1992.[77]
Pietro Nenni (1891–1980): Politician, the leader of Italian Socialist Party 1931–1945 and 1949–1963, Deputy Prime Minister (Moro I, II and III cabinet), Minister of Foreign Affairs (De Gasperi II Cabinet, Rumor I Cabinet)
Benito Mussolini (1883–1945): Fascist dictator of Italy.[78]
Palmiro Togliatti (1893–1964): Politician, the leader of Italian Communist Party from 1927 to his death in 1964.[79]
Emma Bonino (1948–): Politician, European Commissioner 1995–1999, Minister of Foreign Trade and European Affairs 2006–2008, Deputy Speaker of Italian Senate 2008–2013 and Minister of Foreign Affairs 2013–.
The Netherlands
Ayaan Hirsi Ali (1969–): Somali-Dutch feminist and atheist activist, writer and politician who is known for her views critical of Islam, practices of circumcision and female genital cutting.[80]
Ronald Plasterk (1957–): Politician of the Labour Party (PvdA) and former molecular geneticist. He is Minister of the Interior and Kingdom Relations in the Cabinet Rutte II and was previously Minister of Education, Culture and Science from February 22, 2007 until February 23, 2010 in the Cabinet Balkenende IV.[81]
Diederik Samsom (1971–): Member of the Labour Party (Partij van de Arbeid) and he has been an MP since January 30, 2003.[82]
Poland
Władysław Gomułka (1905–1982): Communist leader.[83]
Aleksander Kwaśniewski (1954–): Former President of Poland (1995–2005).[84]
Zbigniew Religa (1938–2009): Prominent cardiac surgeon, pioneer in human heart transplantation and a Minister of Health of the Republic of Poland.[85]
Włodzimierz Cimoszewicz (1950-): Former Prime Minister of Poland (1996-1997)[86]
Gabriel Narutowicz (1865-1922) : 1st President of Poland (1922).
Józef Piłsudski (1867-1935): Statesman, Marshal of Poland, Chief of State (1918-1922) and Prime Minister of Poland (1926-1928) .[87]
Robert Biedroń: Mayor of Słupsk, member of parliament, LGBT rights activist.
Romania
Nicolae Ceaușescu (1918-1989): Romanian communist leader and head of state from 1967 to 1989.
Remus Cernea (1974–): Activist against discrimination based on faith and religion, an advocate of the separation of church and state.
Ion Iliescu (1930–): President from 1990 until 1996, and from 2000 until 2004.
Gheorghe Gheorghiu-Dej (1901–1965): First communist leader of Romania from 1947 until his death in 1965.
Spain
Santiago Casares Quiroga (1884–1950): Politician, Prime Minister of Spain from May 13 to July 19, 1936.[88]
Sweden
Olof Palme (1927–1986): Politician. He was a two-term Prime Minister of Sweden, heading a Privy Council Government from 1969 to 1976 and a cabinet government from 1982 until his death.[89]
Bengt Westerberg (1943–): Leader of the Liberal People's Party from 1983 to 1995. Minister for Social Affairs and Deputy Prime Minister from 1991 to 1994. Currently holds office as the Deputy President of the International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies in Geneva, Switzerland.[90]
United Kingdom
Further information: All-Party Parliamentary Humanist Group
Guy Aldred (1886–1963): English anarchist communist and a prominent member of the Anti-Parliamentary Communist Federation.[91]
William Crawford Anderson (1877–1919): British socialist politician, a founder member of the Union of Democratic Control.[92]
Edward Aveling (1849–1898): English Marxist activist and partner of Karl Marx's daughter Eleanor.[93]
Bessie Braddock JP (1899–1970): British Labour politician, vice-chairman of the party in 1968.[94]
Charles Bradlaugh (1833–1891): Liberal politician and one of the most famous English atheists of the 19th century.[95]
James Callaghan KG, PC (1912–2005): British politician, Prime Minister of the United Kingdom from 1976 to 1979 and the only person to have served in all four of the Great Offices of State.[96]
Alastair Campbell (1957–): Director of Communications and Strategy for the Prime Minister of the United Kingdom from 1997 to 2003.[97][98]
Michael Cashman (1950–): British actor turned Labour politician, a former Member of the European Parliament (1999–2014).[99]
Colin Challen (1953–): British Labour politician, Member of Parliament (2001–2010).[100]
Charles Clarke (1950–): British Labour Party politician, a Member of Parliament since 1997 and former Home Secretary.[101]
Nick Clegg (1967–): former Deputy Prime Minister of the United Kingdom, Lord President of the Council (with special responsibility for political and constitutional reform), and the British Liberal Democrat Leader from 2007 to 2015.[102][103]
Robin Cook (1946–2005): Secretary of State for Foreign & Commonwealth Affairs of the UK (1997–2001), whose funeral service was held in the High Kirk of Scotland, where he was described as a "Presbyterian atheist. "[104]
Meghnad Desai, Baron Desai (1940–): British economist, writer and Labour politician.[105]
Donald Dewar (1937–2000): British Politician and Scottish first minister, from May 1999 until his sudden death in October 2000[106]
Frank Dobson (1940–): British Labour politician and member of Parliament for Holborn and St. Pancras.[107]
Jack Dormand (1919–2003): British educationist and Labour politician.[108]
Herbert Fisher OM (1865–1940): English historian, educator, and Liberal politician.[109]
Donald Findlay QC (1951–): Senior Scottish advocate and Queen's Counsel.[110]
Shreela Flather, Baroness Flather (1934–): British Conservative peer in the House of Lords, the first Asian woman to receive a peerage.[111]
Michael Foot (1913–2010): British politician and writer, leader of the Labour Party 1980–1983.[112]
Sir George Taubman Goldie (1846–1925): Manx administrator who, as founder of the Royal Niger Company, played a major role in the founding of Nigeria.[113]
Evan Harris (1965–): British Liberal Democrat politician and former MP.[114]
Roy Hattersley PC (1932–): British Labour Party politician, author and journalist, Deputy Leader of the Labour Party 1983–1992.[115]
Douglas Houghton PC CH (1898–1996): British Labour politician.[116]
Robert Hughes, Baron Hughes of Woodside (1932–): British Labour politician.[117]
Tommy Jackson (1879–1955): English founder of the Socialist Party of Great Britain and later the Communist Party of Great Britain.[118]
Joel Joffe, Baron Joffe CBE (1932–): South Africa-born British Labour peer in the House of Lords.[119]
Oona King, Baroness King of Bow (1967–): Labour peer in the House of Lords, former MP for Bethnal Green and Bow (1997–2005).[120]
Neil Kinnock PC (1942–): British Labour politician, Leader of the Opposition and Labour Party leader 1983–1992.[121]
Ken Livingstone (1945–): Mayor of London 2000-08.[122]
Gus Macdonald, Baron Macdonald of Tradeston CBE, PC (1940–): British Labour politician.[123]
John Maxton, Baron Maxton (1936–): Scottish politician, MP and now member of the House of Lords.[124][125]
David Miliband (1965–): British Labour politician, Foreign Secretary from 2007 to 2010.[126]
Ed Miliband (1969–): British Labour politician, Leader of the Opposition and Leader of the Labour Party from 2010 to 2015.[127]
Rhodri Morgan (1939-2017), former First Minister of Wales and leader of Welsh Labour (2000-2009).[128][129]
Julie Morgan (1941-), Welsh Assembly Member for Cardiff North and former MP for Cardiff North.[130]
John Morley, 1st Viscount Morley of Blackburn OM, PC (1838–1923): British Liberal statesman, writer and newspaper editor.[131]
Mo Mowlam (1949–2005): Former Secretary of State for Northern Ireland.[132]
Elaine Murphy, Baroness Murphy (1949–2005): British politician and a member of the House of Lords, and a doctor and academic, formerly Professor of Psychiatry of Old Age at Guy's Hospital.[133]
Marion Phillips (1881–1932): Australia-born Labour Party politician and British Member of Parliament.[134]
Phil Piratin (1907–1995): British member of the Communist Party of Great Britain (CPGB) and one of their few Members of Parliament.[135]
Herbert Samuel, 1st Viscount Samuel: Liberal Party Leader 1931–1935.
Phil Sawford (1950–): British politician and former Member of Parliament for Kettering.[136]
Brian Sedgemore (1937–): former left-wing British Labour Party politician.[137]
Clare Short (1946–): British politician, former Labour Secretary of State for International Development.[138]
Dennis Skinner (1932–): British politician, who has been the Labour Member of Parliament for Bolsover since 1970.[139]
Peter Tatchell, Australian-born British human rights activist[140]
Phillip Whitehead (1937–2005): British Labour politician, television producer and writer.[141]
Other in Europe
Gaudenz Canova (1887–1962): Swiss lawyer and Social Democratic member of the National Council of Switzerland from Graubünden (Grisons).[142]
Dimitris Christofias (1946–): Greek Cypriot politician, President of Cyprus 2008–2013.[143]
Vaso Čubrilović (1897–1990): Bosnian student, a conspirator in the assassination of Archduke Franz Ferdinand of Austria.[144]
Elio Di Rupo (1951–): Belgian politician, social democratic Belgian prime minister between 2011 and 2014, describes himself as an atheist, rationalist and Freemason.[145]
Theodor Herzl (1860–1904): Austro-Hungarian Jewish journalist and founder of modern political Zionism.[146]
Zoran Janković (1953–): Slovenian businessman, former mayor of Ljubljana, the capital of Slovenia, and a deputy.[147]
Alexander Lukashenko (1954–): President of Belarus, describes himself as "an Orthodox atheist. "[148]
Slobodan Milošević (1941–2006): Serbian politician, former President of Serbia and of Yugoslavia.[149]
Ivica Račan (1944–2007): Prime Minister of Croatia (2000–2003), former Croatian leftist politician who led the Social Democratic Party of Croatia between 1989 up to 2007. He was also the last leader and democratic transformer of the League of Communists of Croatia.[150]
Hedi Stadlen (1916–2004): Austrian Jewish political activist, philosopher and musicologist.[151]
Veton Surroi (1961–): Kosovo Albanian publicist and politician.[152]
Erkki Tuomioja (1946–): Finnish politician, Minister for Foreign Affairs 2000–2007 and 2011–2015.[153]
Josip Broz Tito (1892–1980) 1st President of Yugoslavia
Zoran Milanović (1966–): Prime Minister of Croatia
Miloš Zeman (1944–): President of the Czech Republic
North America
Canada
Gilles Duceppe (b. 1947): Politician, Leader of the Opposition twice from 1996 to 1997 and Leader of the Bloc Québécois from 1997 to 2011.[154]
Dale Jackaman (b. 1956): Politician.[155]
Pauline Marois (b. 1949): Premier of Quebec from 2012 to 2014, leader of Parti Québécois from 2007 to 2014.[156][157]
Françoise David (b. 1948): Spokesperson and MNA for Quebec Solidaire.
Mexico
Carlos A. Madrazo (1915–1969): politician
Narciso Bassols (1897–1959) politician
Lázaro Cárdenas (1895–1970) former president of Mexico
Venustiano Carranza (1859–1920): former President of Mexico
Plutarco Elías Calles (1877–1945): former President of Mexico
Tomás Garrido Canabal (1891–1943): politician
Benito Juarez (1806–1872): former President of Mexico
Alvaro Obregon (1880–1928): former President of Mexico
United States
Rocky Anderson (b. 1951): 2012 Justice Party Presidential Candidate and former mayor of Salt Lake City, Utah[158]
Charles T. Beaird (1922–2006): Republican Party member and newspaper publisher.[159]
Cecil Bothwell (b. 1950): Asheville, North Carolina city council member, who was nearly denied his position because of his atheism.
Lori Lipman Brown (b. 1958): Politician, lobbyist, lawyer, educator, and social worker supporter, Nevada state senator from 1992 to 1994.[160]
Douglas Campbell (b. 1959): Atheist advocate and member of the Green Party of Michigan and of the Godless Americans Political Action Committee.[161] Co-founder, Michigan Godless Americans Political Action Committee.[162] Green Party candidate for governor of Michigan in both 2002 and 2006.
Ernie Chambers (b. 1937): Member of the Nebraska Legislature and civil rights activist.[163]
Clarence Darrow (1857–1938): Lawyer and leading member of the American Civil Liberties Union, best known for defending John T. Scopes in the so-called Monkey Trial.[164][165][166]
Josh Elliott (b. circa 1970): Member of the Connecticut House of Representatives[167]
Sean Faircloth (b. circa 1960): Attorney, served five terms in the Maine Legislature including appointments on the Judiciary and Appropriations Committees.
Barney Frank (b. 1940): U.S. Representative (1981–2013) (D-MA).[168][169]
Thomas Gore (1870–1949): United States Senator (D-OK), from 1907 until 1921 and from 1931 until 1937.[170]
Vincent Hallinan (1896–1992): Lawyer who ran for president of the United States in 1952 under the Progressive Party, the third highest polling candidate in the election.[171]
Jared Huffman (b. 1964): United States Congressman (D-CA) since 2013. He revealed in 2017 that he is a humanist and a non-believer.[172]
Heather Mac Donald (b. 1956): Writer and lawyer, member of the Manhattan Institute and author of The Burden of Bad Ideas: How Modern Intellectuals Misshape Our Society.[173]
Culbert Olson (1876–1962): Politician and Governor of California from 1939 to 1943.[174]
Pete Stark (b. 1931): U.S. Representative (1973–2013) (D-CA), the first openly atheist member of Congress.[175]
Eddie Tabash: Lawyer and atheist activist and debater.[176]
Jesse Ventura (b. 1951): Former Governor of Minnesota, veteran, wrestler, actor, and talk show host.[177][178][179]
George Will (b. 1941): newspaper columnist and political commentator[180][181]
Alan Wolfe (b. 1951): Political scientist and sociologist, director of the Boisi Center for Religion and American Public Life.[182]
Andrew Zwicker (b. 1964): Member of the New Jersey General Assembly; scientist and educator, Princeton Plasma Physics Laboratory.[183]
South America
Argentina
Carmen Argibay (1939–2014): Lawyer, a member of the Argentine Supreme Court of Justice, the first woman to be nominated for the Court by a democratic government in Argentina.[184]
Guyana
Janet Jagan (1920–2009): American-born socialist politician, Prime Minister and then President of Guyana.[185]
Paraguay
José Gaspar Rodríguez de Francia (1766–1840): Dictator of Paraguay between 1814 and 1840.[186]
Uruguay
José Mujica (b.1935): Politician and President of Uruguay from 2010 to 2015.[187]
Notes and references
 Gill, Peter (2010). Body Count: How they turned AIDS into a catastrophe. London: Profile Books. ISBN 9781847651082.
 "Although Hurley's ecumenical links stopped short of the Communist Party, Alec Erwin, today's South African Minister of Trade and Industry, recalled their friendship in anti-apartheid days, though Erwin was an atheist and "he knew of my support for the Communist cause"." Randolph Vigne, 'Obituary: Archbishop Denis Hurley, Progressive South African Prelate', The Independent (London), February 25, 2004, Pg. 34.
 Paris Review, Interview with Gordimer Archived 2008-05-28 at the Wayback Machine..
 "Maikel Nabil Sanad مايكل نبيل سند: About me". Maikelnabil.com. 2010-12-05. Retrieved 2011-08-14.
 "OBITUARY: Joe Slovo". The Independent. London. 7 January 1995. Although Joe grew up in a religious household, he became an atheist while retaining respect for "the positive aspects of Jewish culture".
 Leakey, Leakey (1983). One Life: An Autobiography. (p. 38)
 http://nematsadat.blogspot.com/2015/06/when-gay-marriage-reaches-eastern-world.html
 http://www.globalpost.com/dispatches/globalpost-blogs/commentary/afghanistan-election-lgbt-rights-can-pave-the-road-peace
 "Archived copy". Archived from the original on 2016-01-20. Retrieved 2016-03-13.
 "No one expects China's position on Tibet to become any more negotiable than it has been. But in one revealing moment, Mr Jiang gave a glimpse of the difficulties Peking has in understanding why other countries abhor its policies in Tibet. "I myself am an atheist", he said. "During my visit to the US last year and during my previous visit to European countries, I found that although the education, science and technology have developed to a very high level and the people are now enjoying modern civilisation, still quite a number of them have a belief in Lamaism." Teresa Poole, 'Jiang keeps channels open to Dalai Lama', The Independent (London), June 28, 1998, Pg. 16.
 "With revolution came a new, atheist regime – one that frowned on all religious belief." China's Catholics: Far from Rome, by Holly Williams, BBC News, December 24, 2003, (Accessed April 14, 2008)
 "...Mao was an atheist..." Death Ritual as Political Trickster in the People's Republic of China, by A. P. Cheater, Source: The Australian Journal of Chinese Affairs, No. 26 (Jul., 1991), pp. 67-97 (p. 92), published by Contemporary China Center, Australian National University
 "Mao is not only a historical figure, of course, but is part of the (tattered) web of legitimacy on which the People's Republic rests. He is part of the founding mythology of the Chinese government, the Romulus and Remus of "People's China", and that's why his portrait hangs in Tiananmen Square. Even among ordinary Chinese, Mao retains a hold on the popular imagination, and some peasants in different parts of China have started traditional religious shrines honoring him. That's the ultimate honor for an atheist – he has become a god." 'Mao': The Real Mao, Nicholas D. Kristof, The New York Times, October 23, 2005 (Accessed April 25, 2008)
 "On religion, Periyar used both lip and pen rationally and forcefully. He was convinced that people used religion only as a mask to deceive the innocent people. Periyar proclaimed himself as a vowed atheist. Puranas, shastras and smritis were the target of his vociferous condemnation. He firmly asserted that these were responsible in making the public feel hardy and superstitious. At one stage, he asserted that the meaningless religious treatises must be burnt. He believed that belief in God dampens the natural human qualities such as initiatives, perseverance and enthusiasm. Fear of God is the beginning of one's own foolishness. Periyar attacked mainly Hinduism and its gods, because they are the greatest enemy of human equality and liberty. He felt that if a person should live with self-respect he must do away with religion." Louis Antony, com/louis.pdf Political Philosophy of Periyar (pdf), Pg. 27.
 "There are religions that have very rigid rules and there are others that don't. Religion is something that I, as a person, am not interested in. I have always been an atheist. My parents were atheists. It doesn't bother me if somebody is religious. My problem is when religion is used to institutionalise other things." The Rediff Interview/ Subhasini Ali, August 8, 2001 (accessed April 21, 2008).
 "It may be 60 years since the DMK broke away from the Dravidar Kazhagam, but some affinities run very deep, and across generations. Poet turned-politician Kanimozhi earned encomiums from DK president K Veeramani for expounding the ideals of DK founder, the late rationalist leader Periyar. The atheist in her was in full flow as she spoke at the DK's youth wing conference and posed some trenchant questions to believers and went on to express concern over the present-day youth's understanding of the Dravidian movement and its contribution. Veeramani was so impressed that he not only gave her 100 out of 100 in rationalist philosophy. And he laid claim to priority in her ideological loyalty. "You belong to us first, and then only to the DMK", he exulted." The rationalist poet, Times of India, 8 September 2008 (accessed 9 September 2008).
 "For the AIADMK enthusiasts, there is no conflict of ideologies. Their leader, the late M. G. Ramachandran, was an atheist turned ardent Mookambikai devotee. But, for the activists of the DMK, whose leader, M. Karunanidhi, is a sworn atheist, it is a tussle between personal beliefs and the party's ideological moorings." 'Rationalism takes the back seat', The Hindu, 8 September 2002.
 "Since Karunanidhi is an atheist he seems to believe in Janatha Janardhan rather than the Janardhan (God) found in temples and places of worship." K. B. Ganapathy, 'Jaya scored a self-goal', OurKarnataka.com (accessed 9 September 2008).
 "But Roy was an atheist and fierce priest hater..." Leonard A. Gordon (February 1968). "Portrait of a Bengal Revolutionary". The Journal of Asian Studies. 27 (2): 197–216. JSTOR 2051747.
 Why I am an Atheist, Bhagat Singh, October 1930.
 "Surjeet, who always sported a white turban, was also passionately opposed to the Sikh separatist campaign that bled Punjab for a decade until 1993. An atheist, he led a spartan lifestyle and always wore simple, even crumpled clothes." M.R. Narayan Swamy and Monobina Gupta, Indo-Asian News Service: 'Harkishan Singh Surjeet – nationalist to Communist and then kingmaker[permanent dead link]', Hindustan Times, August 1, 2008 (accessed August 1, 2008).
 PTI (13 May 2013). "Siddaramaiah takes charge as Karnataka CM, unveils Rs 4,409.81 crore bonanza for poor". Indian Express. Retrieved 19 May 2013.
 http://archive.deccanherald.com/deccanherald/july162004/n3.asp
 "Well, I myself am a 100% atheist. And I am increasingly worried that the Israeli-Palestinian struggle, which dominates our entire life, is assuming a more and more religious character." Uri Avnery, A War of Religions? God Forbid! Archived 2007-10-21 at the Wayback Machine., Ramallah Online February 19, 2007(?) (accessed April 28, 2008).
 Zev Chafets (2008). A Match Made in Heaven: American Jews, Christian Zionists, and One Man's Exploration of the Weird and Wonderful Judeo-Evangelical Alliance. HarperCollins. p. 37. ISBN 9780060890599. "To be a realist here, you have to believe in miracles, " David Ben-Gurion once remarked. He didn't believe that literally, of course; he was an atheist. But he insisted that his officials and generals take Old Testament names.
 Tariq Ali (2003). The Clash of Fundamentalisms: Crusades, Jihads and Modernity (2 ed.). Verso. p. 10. ISBN 9781859844571. Ben-Gurion and Moshe Dayan were self-proclaimed atheists.
 Giulio Meotti (2011). A New Shoah: The Untold Story of Israel's Victims of Terrorism. ReadHowYouWant.com. p. 147. ISBN 9781459617414. Even atheist and socialist Israelis like David Ben-Gurion, Moshe Dayan, and Golda Meir were marked by the stories and legends of King David and the prophets. In other words, their lives had been shaped by Hebron.
 Karen Armstrong (1997). Jerusalem: One City, Three Faiths. Random House Digital, Inc. p. 369. ISBN 9780345391681. Even a committed atheist like Ben-Gurion found its sacred position on his own emotional map more compelling than the demographic and historical facts that were staring him in the face.
 Jonathan B. Isacoff (2006). "2". Writing the Arab-Israeli Conflict: Pragmatism And Historical Inquiry. Lexington Books. p. 54. ISBN 9780739112731. David Ben-Gurion makes an especially fascinating study as a spokesman for Jewish messianic teleology in that by most accounts he was a secular atheist.
 Eyal Chowers (2012). The Political Philosophy of Zionism: Trading Jewish Words for a Hebraic Land. Cambridge University Press. p. 124. ISBN 9781107005945. David Ben-Gurion (1886–1973), the first prime minister of Israel and its foremost politician in the age...Though an atheist, he saw the Bible as the most important source for shaping the new Hebrew's identity...
 Israel Shahak (1994). Jewish History, Jewish Religion: The Weight of Three Thousand Years. Pluto Press. p. 8. ISBN 9780745308197. In 1956 I eagerly swallowed all of Ben-Gurion's political and military reasons for Israel initiating the Suez War, until he (in spite of being an atheist, proud of his disregard of the commandments of Jewish religion) pronounced in the Knesset on the third day of that war, that the real reason for it is 'the restoration of the kingdom of David and Solomon' to its Biblical borders.
 "What united them was opposition to a supposedly corrupt and pro-western administration, unfairly dominated by factions of Lebanon's Maronite Christian community. Notwithstanding his own professed atheism, Hawi, Greek Orthodox by birth, was valued as an iconic Christian figure within a coalition often painted as sectarian Muslim." Lawrence Joffe, 'Obituary: George Hawi: Lebanese communist leader who espoused Muslim-Christian dialogue', The Guardian (London)June 22, 2005, Pg. 29.
 "Rabin was an atheist. He had nothing to do with the religious calendar. Not to mention the fact that the "Jewish" calendar is really a Babylonian one, and that its months carry the names of Babylonian gods." Uri Avnery, The Real Rabin, Ma'ariv.
 "[Pod Znamenem Marksizma] must be a militant atheist organ... a journal which sets out to propagandise militant materialism must carry on untiring atheist propaganda and an untiring atheist fight." On the Significance of Militant Materialism, V. I. Lenin, Pod Znamenem Marksizma No. 3, March 12, 1922, as published in Lenin's Collected Works, Progress Publishers, Moscow, Volume 33, 1972, pp. 227-236 (Translated by David Skvirsky and George Hanna), hosted at Marxists Internet Archive (Accessed November 14, 2007)
 "I am not a religious believer, and the Bible is not an authority for me. I never did recognize it as an authority even before I joined the party. I always was an atheist." Memoirs of Nikita Khrushchev: Volume 3: Statesman, 1953–1964, p.9. Edited by MR Sergei Khrushchev. 2007, Penn State Press, ISBN 0-271-02332-5.
 "Khrushchev was a convinced atheist who displayed little tolerance for the traditions and symbols of pre-revolutionary Russia." Intellectuals and Apparatchiks: Russian Nationalism and the Gorbachev Revolution, p.61. Kevin O'Connor. 2006, Lexington Books, ISBN 0-7391-0771-2.
 Stalin is quoted as saying "You know, they are fooling us, there is no God...all this talk about God is sheer nonsense" in E. Yaroslavsky, Landmarks in the Life of Stalin, Foreign Languages Publishing House, Moscow 1940
 "Trotsky's Testament". Retrieved 2007-12-09. I shall die a proletarian revolutionist, a Marxist, a dialectical materialist, and, consequently, an irreconcilable atheist.
 "It has just been revealed that Thuy used to earn a living as a sorcerer […] he travelled around the country selling magical charms, spells and cures, and spreading Communist propaganda at the same time. This information was volunteered by a Viet Cong colonel who recently came over to the South Vietnam Government side. He said they Thuy, being an atheist, clearly did not believe in his own magical powers, but had used sorcery purely as a cover for his political work." 'Party Tricks', 'The Times Diary', The Times, June 7, 1968; pg. 8; Issue 57271; col F.
 Geoffrey Blainey; A Short History of Christianity; Viking; 2011; p.543
 "He became a doubter of the Christian religion at a very early age. It was the questions asked by the man Friday of Robinson Crusoe that set his analytical mind asking the why and wherefore. […] He became an atheist at 15, much to the grief of his beloved mother and the disgust of his harsh and bigoted Wesleyan father. Often in later life, when his mother found a home under his roof, he carried the "War Cry" in one pocket and "The Free Thinker" in the other." Annie Westbrook, 'Monty Miller – An Appreciation by Angela (Annie) Westbrook', International Socialist, December 1920. Archived online at http://www.takver.com/history/monty_miller.htm
 "In 1886–89 Trenwith prepared for parliament in a dozen lesser forums, assuming executive positions on the Workingman's Club, the Democratic Society, the Sunday Liberation Society and the Secularist Society. Despite his avowed atheism, he edged his way into respectable circles. In 1886, he was appointed a commissioner on the Adelaide Jubilee International Exhibition in 1887 and took a similar post on Melbourne's International Exhibition of 1888. He also sat on the provisional committee of the Working Men's College." Bruce Scates: 'Trenwith, William Arthur (Billy) (1846–1925)', Australian Dictionary of Biography, Online Edition (accessed July 16, 2008).
 "A professed atheist, he fought for causes such as republicanism, political separation for the goldfields and miners' safety; he also opposed Asian immigration." E. Jaggard, 'Vosper, Frederick Charles Burleigh (1869–1901)', Australian Dictionary of Biography Online Edition (accessed July 16, 2008).
 "Sir John Latham came from a religious family but from university was an avowed atheist". Sir John Latham: Judicial reasoning in defence of the Commonwealth, Medium.com., 21 October 2015.
 "Senator Lionel Murphy had been born into a Catholic family, although he was himself an avowed atheist." Jenny Hocking (2008), Gough Whitlam: A Moment in History, The Miegunyah Press, p. 422. ISBN 978-0-522-85705-4.
 In 1996 Hayden was recognised as the Australian Humanist of the Year with the statement that "The award is made because he has shown that an avowed atheist who describes himself as a secular humanist can occupy the position of Governor-General with mounting approval." Australian Humanist, No. 41 February, 1996
 "Being an atheist—as I am—is not a necessary pre-condition for being a humanist." in his acceptance speech for Australian Humanist of the Year, reported in Australian Humanist, No 42, May 1996
 "I'm an avowed republican and I'm an atheist". "Anthem plans too simplistic, says WA Premier". ABC News. 27 January 2006. Retrieved 11 February 2018.
 In a 2013 interview with The Washington Post, Gillard stated: "I think it would be inconceivable for me if I were an American to have turned up at the highest echelon of American politics being an atheist, single and childless." Weymouth, Lally (3 March 2013). "Lally Weymouth interviews Australian Prime Minister Julia Gillard". The Washington Post. Retrieved 4 January 2016.
 In her 2014 autobiography, My Story, Gillard stated, "Kevin had to be the leader in our alliance because I understood that I was not what Labor needed at that point: a woman, not married, an atheist." "Julia Gillard says Kevin Rudd was a man desperate for applause". The Australian. 24 September 2016. Retrieved 7 February 2016.
 "The influence of John A. Lee was reflected in his oratorical style and mannerisms, self-confidence and optimism, a sometimes scathing sense of humour, and probably his atheism." Hudson, Switzer. "Douglas, Norman Vazey 1910–1985". Dictionary of New Zealand Biography. Ministry for Culture and Heritage. Retrieved 5 April 2011.
 "Preferring his second name, he began calling himself Dove-Myer. He also rejected Judaism, becoming a lifelong atheist." Edgar, John. "Robinson, Dove-Myer 1901–1989". Dictionary of New Zealand Biography. Ministry for Culture and Heritage. Retrieved 5 April 2011.
 Sang M. Lee writes that Albania was "[o]fficially an atheist state under Hoxha..." Restructuring Albanian Business Education Infrastructure[dead link] August 2000 (Accessed June 6, 2007)
 Kamm, Henry (1993, June 10). 'Hallelujah' is heard in the arch-atheist's temple. The New York Times (Late Edition (East Coast)), p. A4. Retrieved August 27, 2007, from National Newspaper Abstracts
 "Because of his Jewish origin, his atheism, and his "European", rather than "Danish", outlook, Brandes was, from the beginning of his political career, at odds with the more moderate faction of the left coalition that formed the Left Reform Party in the late 1890s." 'Brandes, Edvard', Encyclopædia Britannica Online (accessed August 1, 2008).
 Politiken, "Folkekirken har brug for frisind", August 19, 2012. "De socialdemokratiske statsministre Stauning, Hedtoft, H.C. Hansen og J. O. Krag var ateister og ikke medlemmer af folkekirken". "The Danish primeministers Stauning, Hedtoft, H.C. Hansen and J.O. Krag were atheists and not members of the Church of Denmark".
 "M. Clemenceau does not belong to the Socialist party, but is nevertheless a convinced atheist. He opposes zealously the idea of God, and preaches revolt against Him." Eugne Tavernier, 'The Religious Question In France. I. A French Catholic's View', The Times, November 6, 1909; p. 5; Issue 39110; col F.
 "The meanings of the term humanism have changed significantly over the years; the use of the term in its modern sense can be found in the atheistic concept of writers such as Karl Marx and Pierre Joseph Proudhon." Burgin, David, The Humanist, Jan 1, 1994. [1]
 "Although an atheist, Romme did not support deChristianization, nor did he regret the fall of Maximilien Robespierre." Historical Dictionary of the French Revolution, by Paul R. Hanson, Scarecrow Press, 2004, p. 281 (Accessed April 15, 2008)
 Terror By Graeme Fife
 Elkaïm, Olivia (5 April 2012). "François Hollande : des origines protestantes hollandaises". La Vie (in French). Retrieved 3 February 2013. (In December 2011, Hollande told the French Christian magazine La Vie that he respects all religious practices but has none of his own: "En décembre dernier, François Hollande confiait à La Vie : 'Je n'ai aucune pratique religieuse. Mais je respecte toutes les confessions. La mienne est de ne pas en avoir.'")
 Contribution to the Critique of Hegel's Philosophy of Right, 1843
 "He actually had little in common with the girl. She was devout Roman Catholic, he an atheist; she came from the mild Swabian region, he from the harsh borderlands of West Prussia; she was a singer who hardly cared about politics, he a politician who knew little about music." Kurt Schumacher: A Study in Personality and Political Behavior, by Lewis J. Edinger, Stanford University Press. 1965, p. 29 (Accessed May 4, 2013)
 http://www.sahra-wagenknecht.de/de/article/7.das_leben_leben.html Interviewer: "Gibt es bei Ihnen auch ab und an Zweifel am Atheismus? (Do you doubt your atheism from time to time?)" Sahra Wagenknecht: "Eigentlich nicht. (Not really.)"
 Carroll, Steven. "Gilmore reiterates tax pledge". The Irish Times.
 "Election 2011 – 18 February". RTÉ News. February 18, 2011.
 Interview in the Mail with Clare Daly TD | The Cedar Lounge Revolution
 "As an atheist in Ireland's most conspicuously Catholic city, and an opponent of ardent Republicanism at the height of the Troubles, Jim Kemmy never ran away from a battle. But, though vilified by opponents on issues from Northern Ireland to abortion to contraception, he survived to become the conscience of the Irish Left." Alan Murdoch, 'Obituary: Jim Kemmy', The Independent (London), September 27, 1997, Pg. 24.
 Bacik to Speak at World Atheist Conference
 http://www.oireachtas.ie/members-hist/default.asp?housetype=1&HouseNum=24&MemberID=2248&ConstID=209
 "Two weeks ago, the minister for social affairs, Proinsias de Rossa, announced the setting up of a commission on the family. He was described to me as "the social conscience of the present government, that tends to be a little Thatcherite." He is a socialist and an avowed atheist, remarkable for an Irish politician." Peter Lennon, 'Flocking to the cause', The Guardian (London), November 14, 1995, Features Pages, Pg. T4.
 "She had been a militant nationalist among the pacifist internationalist feminists, a republican among the free staters, a feminist among the nationalists, and an atheist in holy Ireland." Sybil Oldfield, 'Skeffington, Johanna Mary Sheehy- (1877–1946)', Oxford Dictionary of National Biography, Oxford University Press, 2004 (accessed May 2, 2008).
 "His parents combined Irish nationalism, atheism, feminism, pacifism, and socialism. Sheehy-Skeffington learned to think for himself, coming to share their politics, minus his mother's later abstentionist republicanism." D. R. O'Connor Lysaght, 'Skeffington, Owen Lancelot Sheehy- (1909–1970)', Oxford Dictionary of National Biography, Oxford University Press, 2004 (accessed May 6, 2008).
 "Such actions established among the Catholic population of the area a long-lived reputation for kindness and fair dealing which persisted despite his professed atheism." Noel Thompson, 'Thompson, William (1775–1833)', Oxford Dictionary of National Biography, Oxford University Press, 2004 (accessed May 6, 2008).
 http://www.socialistworld.net/doc/3595
 "In his latest incarnation, Mr. Ferrara is running for Parliament on a small slate devoted to a single issue: "pro-life", which he defines loosely. An avowed atheist and nonbeliever, he has called for a "moratorium", but not a ban, on abortion, to call attention to the value of life." Rachel Donadio, 'The Atheist Urging Italy to Get Religion', New York Times, April 6, 2008 (accessed June 16, 2008).
 "A diligent pupil, she won a scholarship to Milan's prestigious Catholic university – which left no traces of religiosity. An untormented atheist, she died without a priest at her side." Donald Sassoon, 'Nilde Iotti: Italy's leading post-war woman politician and a founding mother of the republic', The Guardian, December 9, 1999, Leader Pages, Pg. 24.
 Mussolini wrote a pamphlet entitled God does not exist. Historian Denis Mack Smith wrote that Mussolini thought: "Science had proved that God did not exist and the Jesus of history was an ignorant Jew whose family thought him mad... Religion, he said, was a disease of the psyche, an epidemic to be cured by psychiatrists, and Christianity in particular was vitiated by preaching the senseless virtues of resignation and cowardice." Smith DM (1982). Mussolini: a biography. New York: Knopf.
 "Churches along the route were closed. It was said at the Vatican that this could be seen as a silent protest against an atheist's funeral on such a scale in the heart of Christian Rome." 'Communist Show Of Strength At Signor Togliatti's Funeral', The Times, August 26, 1964; pg. 7; Issue 56100; col C.
 Choudhury, Sohail. "Controversial Ayaan Hirsi Ali, Muslim turned atheist, to resign from Dutch Parliament". Asian Tribune.
 (in Dutch) ""Er is geen verband tussen altruïsme en God" – Interview met Plasterk". Persbericht De Groene Amsterdammer. 22 January 2001. Archived from the original on 27 September 2007.
 Abswoude, Peter van (February 2003). "Colloquium cum Diederik Samsom". Stentor: Acta Scholastica Gymnasii Civitatis Leovardiensis (in Dutch). 3: 23–25.
 "Above all, however, Mr. Gomulka is an atheist, and he is now strong enough to say so in a country which is not." 'Mr. Gomulka Bolder Against Church', The Times, Wednesday, Feb 08, 1961; pg. 11; Issue 55000; col D.
 "I am an atheist and everybody knows it..." Atheist premier attacks lack of Christianity in EU constitution, by Ambrose Evans-Pritchard, The Telegraph, June 4, 2003.
 "I am confirmed in my conviction that there is no god." Religa-utwierdzam-sie-w-przekonaniu-ze-Boga-nie-ma,wid,10523341,wiadomosc_prasa.html?ticaid=17a23|interview at wp.pl
 Werner, Anita (2012-10-26). Nieoficjalnie. Pointa. p. 324.
 "Religion is for brainless people".
 "Her father, Santiago Casares Quiroga, a leftwing atheist, defied another Galician native, born just across the estuary at Ferrol, Francisco Franco, the Caudillo in person." James Kirkup, 'Obituary: Maria Casares, Free Spirit of the French Stage', The Guardian (London), November 26, 1996, Features, Pg. 16.
 "He was an atheist and saw war as the greatest threat to mankind. The popularity of the Swedish model society probably peaked in the early seventies, but Olof Palme tirelessly continued his development toward a society as he saw it." Jens Moe, My America: The Culture of Giving, page 155.
 "Bengt Westerberg: Humanistisk ledning av Röda Korset" (in Swedish). Humanisten. Archived from the original on 2007-08-09. Retrieved 2007-08-18. Translation:
Interviewer: I would like to ask you about your relation to religion and atheistic humanism. When did you "come out" as [an] atheist and how did it happen?
Westerberg: If you mean in public, then I revealed it in connection to my candidacy as party leader for the People's Party. I got the question if I believed in God from Thomas Hempel in Radioekot (radioprogram) and answered no. That's when it became known, though I've never made any secret about it.
 "The defendant, in the witness-box, declared that the meeting was quite orderly, and there were cries of "Shame" when he was arrested. He denied the charges. Aldred said he was an Atheist and a Socialist." 'Hyde Park Speech Prosecution. Evidence For The Defence', The Times, Wednesday, Mar 04, 1925; pg. 5; Issue 43901; col G.
 "His mother was an intelligent and widely read woman of strong, radical, Presbyterian views who encouraged William to read extensively and passed on a love of literature which stayed with him long after he was converted to free-thinking atheism." Joseph Melling, 'Anderson, William Crawford (1877–1919), Oxford Dictionary of National Biography, Oxford University Press, Sept 2004; online edn, Jan 2008 (accessed May 2, 2008).
 "His failed marriage aside, he was on a climbing path of conventional success and acclaim, which he left in 1879 when he abandoned his application for the chair of comparative anatomy because the post required its holder to profess Christianity. In July 1879 he made a public pronouncement that he had been an atheist for two or three years. In June 1881 he lost his lectureship, largely because of his atheism." C. A. Creffield: 'Aveling, Edward Bibbens (1849–1898)', Oxford Dictionary of National Biography, Oxford University Press, 2004 [2] (accessed April 29, 2008).
 "Mrs. Braddock, whose husband died in 1963, was an atheist, and her funeral service, next Tuesday at Liverpool crematorium, will be non-sectarian." Christopher Warman, ' 'Merseyside legend' Mrs Braddock dies at 71', The Times, November 14, 1970; pg. 1; Issue 58023; col G.
 Bradlaugh professes and defends atheism in his essay A Plea For Atheism.
 "One of the more enduring marks on British life left by the atheist, Prime Minister Callaghan, was to remove exclusive responsibility for the appointment of bishops from his own office and share it largely with a commission of churchmen. Since 1976, the Prime Minister has been limited to choosing one from two nominees of the commission or, in exceptional cases, sending the list back for the commission to produce a new one." Hugo Young, 'A relic of history best left undisturbed', The Guardian (London), March 27, 1990.
 "You are an atheist. Tony Blair is a devout Christian. Did that make you feel uncomfortable?" Campbell answering questions in The Independent newspaper [3].
 "Mr Campbell, who is an atheist, has been keen to stop Mr Blair discussing his faith since 1996, when the Labour leader gave an extensive interview on the subject in The Telegraph which proved highly controversial. "
[4] The Daily Telegraph.
 "Queer-boy, soap-star, luvvie, Blairite, Michael is also, for the final flourish, something of a Buddhist. 'It seems to me a wonderfully selfless religion – and of course the only one which has had no war fought on its behalf. ' He was brought up a Catholic, 'but not any more. People who think you have to do things now for reward later might feel faced with a comeuppance that, as an atheist, I don't have to deal with. If it turns out that there is a God, and I meet her, I think she'll say: 'Well... you were pretty fearless, and you did what you thought was right. I've got a place for you. ' " Victoria Coren, 'The Monday interview: Michael Cashman: Straight talker', The Guardian, August 24, 1998, Pg. 14.
 "Opposition Members said that many Labour Members hate religion. Perhaps they think that those who support the new clause are atheists. Will my hon. Friend accept my assurance that it is possible to be an atheist and to admire religion? It is even possible to be an atheist and to study it, as I chose to do when I went to university." Colin Challen,
House of Commons Hansard, 6 Feb 2002: Column 952 (accessed April 24, 2008).
 " Home Secretary Charles Clarke has revealed he is "totally opposed" to the concept of creationism. The politician, addressing a faith conference, said he does not believe in God, adding: "I believe that science has to be the basis of where we go and one of the greatest scientists was [Charles] Darwin." 'I don't believe in God, says Clarke', Edinburgh Evening News, 22 March 2006 (accessed 18 February 2009).
 "Clegg 'does not believe in God'". BBC News. 19 December 2007. Retrieved 19 November 2007.
 Hurst, Greg (19 December 2007). "Nick Clegg says: 'I don't believe in God'". The Times. London. Retrieved 20 November 2007. Nick Clegg, the Liberal Democrats’ new leader, has defied political convention with a blunt admission that he is an atheist.
 Labour Party at prayer salutes Cook the atheist, by Magnus Linklater, The Times, August 13, 2005.
 "Lord Desai: Like my noble friend Lord Dormand I am an atheist and therefore should not speak too much about religion, but I am glad that the C[hurch] of E[ngland], having lost money in real estate, is now interested in sex and making money. That is always welcome." Lords Hansard, 4 Jun 1998: Column 481 (accessed April 24, 2008).
 Dog, Black (September 30, 2007). "Gordon upsets the 'in-laws'". Daily Mail. London.
 In a House of Commons debate on historic churches, Sir Patrick Cormack said: "The chairman of the historic churches and chapels group, the right hon. Member for Holborn and St. Pancras (Frank Dobson) […] is a self-proclaimed atheist but shares the affection [for historic churches] that I believe that the Minister has […]" House of Commons Hansard, 14 Dec 2006: Column 1132 (accessed April 24, 2008).
 "As the most insistent of atheists in the House of Lords, after he arrived there in 1987, Dormand demanded equal rights for the non-religious fifth of the population. As a former teacher and education officer, he wanted religions and humanism described neutrally in schools, not propagated. […] But "after some years of very considerable thought", he became an atheist, though "I certainly attempt, although I fail regularly, to live by the Christian ethic." He became more overtly atheist in the Lords than he had been in the Commons, where he had to worry about his religious constituents. […] He started teaching at 21, telling his headmaster that, as an atheist, he was not really qualified to take religious education." Andrew Roth, 'Obituary: Lord Dormand of Easington: Genial chairman during Labour's hard times', The Guardian, December 20, 2003, Pg. 21.
 "Fisher may have underestimated the offence the book would cause because he was himself an agnostic in religious matters; in private letters he described himself as an atheist, and said firmly to his friends that religion 'rots the mind' (J. Hart, Ask me No More, 1998, 204)." A. Ryan, 'Fisher, Herbert Albert Laurens (1865–1940)', Oxford Dictionary of National Biography, Oxford University Press, Sept 2004; online edition, January 2008 [5] (accessed May 1, 2008).
 "Mr Findlay, who describes himself as an atheist, also claimed that under European human rights law he had the right to free speech." joke not intended as offensive, says QC', The Journal Online, June 19, 2007 (accessed May 13, 2008).
 "I am an atheist and yet I am accepted by Hindus because as far as I can I follow the principles of the Gita, which I consider the most important Hindu book. In my small way I try to live by that. I do not believe in God but I believe that we have to live a good life on this Earth." Baroness Flather, Lords Hansard, 19 Apr 2007: Column 341 (accessed April 24, 2008).
 "Why are politicians such awful people, I asked Michael Foot. 'They're not, ' he answered. 'Only the ones who don't do anything else. ' His father's son, obviously. And also his own man. He became fatally estranged from his father's Methodist insistencies as a student, when he came upon Bertrand Russell's humanism. He kept quiet about it at the time. 'No point saying I'm an atheist. It wouldn't have been kind. ' " Sally Vincent, The Guardian, January 2, 1999, Weekend Page, Pg. 16.
 "Goldie's opinions, as much as his actions, defied convention. He was a convinced atheist, an admirer of Huxley, Darwin, and Winwoode Reade." Scarbrough: 'Goldie, Sir George Dashwood Taubman (1846–1925)', rev. John Flint, Oxford Dictionary of National Biography, Oxford University Press, 2004; online edn, Jan 2008 [6] (accessed May 1, 2008).
 "But another prominent atheist, medic and secularist, the Liberal Democrat MP, Dr Evan Harris, is not so sure that 9/11 was the nodal point. "It's not the main thing to scientists", he insists. "When you talk to them the thing that comes up most often is the influence religion has had on science in America under George Bush."" Paul Vallely, 'Religion vs science: can the divide between God and rationality be reconciled?', The Independent, 11 October 2008 (accessed 13 October 2008).
 "I was the visiting atheist on the BBC's weekly religious show a couple of Sundays ago." Roy Hattersley, 'Blighted by a moral code', The Guardian, December 11, 2006, Comment and Debate, Pg. 25.
 "Baroness Blatch: My Lords, if noble Lords, like me, believe in the life hereafter, then it is possible to believe that the doughty animal-lover, the late Lord Houghton of Sowerby, will be looking down on our proceedings today. Lord McIntosh of Haringey: My Lords—Baroness Blatch: I know that the noble Lord is not a believer in these matters. I speak personally; I did make that point. […] Lord McIntosh of Haringey: Before the Minister leaves Lord Houghton of Sowerby, it is not my beliefs that matter; Lord Houghton was to his dying day a devoted atheist." Lords Hansard, March 20, 1997: Column 1142–1143
 "Do we accept the fact that in a wholly elected Chamber there would be no Cross-Benchers and no representatives of the Church of England or any other faith? Fortunately there will still be room for atheists like me, although I would go as well under a wholly elected system." Lord Hughes of Woodside, Lords Hansard, 21 Jan 2003: Column 632 (accessed April 25, 2008).
 "When Jackson in his teens converted 'in a night' to socialism and atheism, he was 'literally ill for days afterwards', and it was another two years before he felt able to reveal his new beliefs to his parents (memoirs, People's History Museum, Manchester)." Kevin Morgan, 'Jackson, Thomas Alfred (1879–1955)', Oxford Dictionary of National Biography, Oxford University Press, 2004 (accessed May 6, 2008).
 "I come to this debate with some hesitation because, although I am an atheist, I have always respected the Church of England for the courageous conduct of some of its clergy in South Africa during the apartheid regime, for its social and community work in the UK and for its stand on many human rights issues, and, of course, my admiration and respect for the most reverend Primate the Archbishop of York is unbounded." Lord Joffe, Lords Hansard, 19 Apr 2007: Column 357 (accessed April 24, 2008).
 King calls herself "a misguided 'cultural' Jew without any culture, and a born-again atheist." My week: Oona King, by Oona King, The Observer, Sunday March 5, 2006 (hosted at guardian.co.uk, accessed March 29, 2008)
 "Mr Blair's private faith is well-documented and almost certainly stronger than any prime minister in recent memory. Mr Hague is more typical in being an occasional church-goer. Neil Kinnock was unique in declaring himself an atheist." Michael White, Political editor, 'Blair to address Christian groups conference', The Guardian, June 26, 2000, Pg. 4.
 "I assume you're an atheist? I am too. Isn't life easier?" "Ken Livingstone: The Interview". attitude. Retrieved 2008-04-25.
 "I speak as someone who was brought up as an atheist, although my free-thinking parents insisted that I spent a great deal of my childhood at Bible class, the Boys' Brigade and Church of Scotland lectures, none of which I regret, but I came back to an atheistic view of the world and have maintained that." Gus Macdonald, Lords Hansard, March 27, 2006: Column GC257 (accessed April 24, 2008).
 "As I have said in the House, I am an atheist and anti-clerical and I do not believe that religion should play the large part that it does in the House or elsewhere." John Maxton, House of Commons Hansard, 23 Jun 1999: Column 1253 (accessed April 24, 2008).
 "I am not religious: my children have never been christened. I openly and proudly announce that I am an atheist." John Maxton, House of Commons Hansard, 29 Oct 1996: Column 518 (accessed April 28, 2008).
 "Miliband, a devout atheist, had forged his reputation as a policy wonk at the Left-leaning Institute for Public Policy Research and was headhunted to become Tony Blair's head of policy at Downing Street." Andrew Pierce, 'Profile of Foreign Secretary David Miliband', Daily Telegraph, July 30, 2008 (accessed August 1, 2008).
 "The Labour leader's atheism puts him in stark contrast to his predecessors Tony Blair and Gordon Brown, for whom religion was a central part of their lives." '[7]', Daily Telegraph, September 29, 2010 (accessed May 25, 2011).
 "Public humanist funeral for Rhodri Morgan at National Assembly for Wales". Humanists UK. 31 May 2017. Retrieved 31 May 2017.
 "Rhodri Morgan funeral to be held at the Senedd, Cardiff". BBC Wales News. 31 May 2017. Retrieved 31 May 2017.
 "Julie Morgan AM". Humanists UK. Retrieved 7 February 2018.
 "[…] Morley was an odd choice for biographer, since he was a "freethinking atheist, and he agreed to the Gladstone family's stipulation that he should refrain from treating Gladstone's religion in any depth." Christopher Howse, 'Why Gladstone had God up his sleeve', Daily Telegraph, November 24, 2007, Pg. 29.
 "She had always proclaimed herself an atheist..." Times obituary: Dr Marjorie Mowlam, August 19, 2005 (Accessed June 6, 2007)
 In a heated debate in the House of Lords in which the Archbishop of Canterbury, Lord Carey, claimed "in my opinion, atheists are not renowned throughout the world for their commitment to the very poor, the starving and the needy", Baroness Murphy replied: "I speak as a rationalist, agnostic—I shall not say atheist in the light of the comments of the noble and right reverend Lord, Lord Carey. It is not a particularly comfortable matter, but one reason to contribute to this debate is to stand up and be counted. I was going to remain rather calm throughout this, but I was rather offended by the comments of the noble and right reverend Lord, Lord Carey, about the role that people without faith have played in doing good in the world. He is entirely and wholly wrong. We feel just as passionately as those who have faith about ensuring that society is just. "
Lords Hansard, 19 Apr 2007: Column 350–351 (accessed April 24, 2008).
 "She died an atheist, from stomach cancer, on January 23, 1932 […]." Brian Harrison, 'Phillips, Marion (1881–1932)', Oxford Dictionary of National Biography, Oxford University Press, Sept 2004; online edition, January 2008 (accessed May 2, 2008).
 "Mr. Piratin declined to take the oath, saying that he was an atheist, and elected to affirm." 'Former Communist M.P.'S Application Suspended Discharge From Bankruptcy', The Times, Saturday, Jul 12, 1952; pg. 3; Issue 52362; col C.
 "I, too, am a republican atheist, by the way—that should be put in the record—and agree with points made by other hon. Members." Phil Sawford, House of Commons Standing Committee on Delegated Legislation (pt 3), October 29, 2001 (accessed April 24, 2008).
 "Moreover, unless I am much mistaken, as that person is a Church Commissioner he must be a member of the Church of England, an organisation of which I was a member before I became an atheist." Brian Sedgemore, House of Commons Hansard, 13 Feb 2002: Column 247 (accessed April 24, 2008).
 "Father Doonagh might have described this helping hand to a needy stranger as an act of Christian charity. That's probably not how the atheist Short would see it." Vincent Graff, 'Order! Order! Politics and Food Special', The Observer (England), May 25, 2008, Observer Food Monthly, Pg. 38.
 " All MPs may reserve a particular seat in Parliament for morning prayers, which they then keep for the rest of the day. Skinner, an atheist, refuses to pray, but still likes to 'bagsy' his favourite pew. Following a complaint from the Tory Chris Grayling, the Serjeant at Arms issued him with a formal reprimand. 'Dennis told him to get stuffed, ' says a colleague. 'It's an excellent spot for heckling, and he's not going to vacate it without a fight. ' " Guy Adams, 'Pandora', The Independent (London), December 13, 2005, Features, Pg. 14.
 Peter Tatchell: Islamists Betray Palestine and Human Rights "They happily work with me, despite my atheism and gayness. This is the kind, gentle face of Islam that never seems to be newsworthy. "
 "It was entirely right that Phillip Whitehead, who loved the village and had lived there since he was three, should have left it in the way that Rowsley men and women have left it for 200 years and more. It was an English funeral in an English village according to the rites of the Church of England. But it is at least a paradox that a man who was an uncompromising atheist – and so described by one of his sons during the service – should be laid to rest with the promise of resurrection and eternal life." Roy Hattersley, 'A decent send-off: Even a hardline atheist can see that the church is better than anyone at staging the last farewell', The Guardian January 16, 2006, Pg. 31.
 "Switzerland: Blasphemy" (23 March 1925). Time. Retrieved 26 May 2010.
 "For instance, Chrysostomos might argue that certain self-declared atheists should not be allowed to vote. It's worth recalling that a couple of years ago, the leader of the communist party AKEL Demetris Christofias said he was an atheist." Elias Hazou, 'Church elections: how it works' Archived 2008-06-06 at the Wayback Machine., Cyprus Mail archive article, September 17, 2006 (accessed May 15, 2008).
 "The philosophical and political differences among the conspirators were expressed at the trial. This was particularly obvious between the two Cubrilović brothers. […] Veljko was a deeply religious man, who spent the whole night before the execution reading St. John's Gospel; Vaso was an atheist, scandalising judges with his statements; […]." 'Back to Sarajevo After 50 Years By Professor Vladimir Dedijer of Harvard', The Times, June 26, 1964; pg. 13; Issue 56048; col F.
 http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/world-europe-15983739
 "He [Chaim Maccoby] spoke out ever more vehemently against Herzl, the self-confessed atheist, and his followers, refusing to preach at one federation synagogue because it dared to host a branch of the Zionist Federation." Geoffrey Alderman, 'Maccoby, Chaim Zundel (1858–1916)', Oxford Dictionary of National Biography, Oxford University Press, 2004 (accessed May 2, 2008).
 "Forty years later, nobody considers it a problem. If we want to engage in intercultural dialogue, we cannot let our Slovene, Ljubljana Muslims celebrate their holidays at sport halls. I am an atheist, but I think that every religious community should have a place of worship built by themselves." Zoran Janković, quoted in 'Mayor tells Bosnian daily building of mosque in Ljubljana "no longer a problem"', BBC Monitoring Europe – Political, May 14, 2008.
 "Belarus president visits Vatican". BBC News. April 27, 2009. Retrieved 2010-06-26.
 "Milosevic buried in quiet ceremony in his hometown". CBC News. 2006-03-18. Retrieved 2008-04-02. There were no clergy at the ceremony because Milosevic was an avowed atheist.
 see religion Ivica Račan
 "Both parents were Jewish, although not observant. Towards the end of the First World War, when there was starvation in Vienna, Hedi's father sent mother and daughter to the countryside; in some villages, farmers and shopkeepers expressed their intense anti-Semitism by refusing to sell food unless the buyer could produce a Christian baptismal certificate. Hans Simon arranged for both mother and daughter to be baptised. Later on, when Hedi was 14, she was able to dispense with a religious identity altogether, choosing to become "konfessionslos" ("without religion"), in accordance with the provisions of the Austrian constitution. It was, for her, a relief: she was already a convinced atheist." Daniel Wolf, 'Obituary: Hedi Stadlen', The Independent (London), January 31, 2004, Pg. 48-49.
 ""Veton liked good food, good wine, Faulkner, opera, La traviata, Tchaikovsky, Celtic music, jazz, blues, you name it", she said. "But he cared more about his people. He was an atheist but most Muslims still respected him", she [his wife] said, before correcting her use of the past tense. "I mean he is an atheist. His favourite novel was Faulkner's As I Lay Dying but I believe he is alive. You have to believe that."" Phil Davison, 'Kosovars wait for news of the lost hero', The Independent (London), May 20, 1999, News, Pg. 5.
 Pallaste, Tuija (December 22, 2009). "Onko joulu pehmittänyt Erkki Tuomiojan pään?". Helsingin Sanomat (in Finnish). Retrieved February 14, 2010.
 Bill Curry and Gloria Galloway (2011-04-21). "How the leaders view religion and politics". Toronto: The Globe and Mail. Retrieved 2012-02-21.
 " Dale Jackaman doesn't believe in God. Those who do worry him, especially fundamentalists. "I'm an atheist", declares Jackaman, a former Army reservist who has served in the Middle East and now runs a computer security firm. […] "Atheists tend not to bother anybody unless they're riled up", Jackaman said. "We're riled up now." […] Jackaman gives the lie to the old saw that there are no atheists in foxholes. He did three tours of duty in the Middle East—two in the Golan Heights and one in Cyprus—with the Army signal corps. Far from igniting any spark of spirituality, his experience in the war-torn Middle East confirmed his belief that religious differences fan the flames of war. "It solidified my atheism", Jackaman said." No god before me, Richmond News October 23, 2007 (accessed April 22, 2008).
 Noémie Mercier (2012-09-12). "Le jour où Pauline Marois est devenue Première ministre" (in French). L'Actualité. Retrieved 2012-12-06. (Page 3)
 "Latest updates: Quebec votes 2014". Montreal Gazette. April 7, 2014. Retrieved April 7, 2014.
 voterocky.org
 Obituary: "He had many friends across a wide spectrum of economic, social and religious backgrounds, all of whom he respected and honored. While Carolyn [his wife] was a devoted Presbyterian, he was a 'nontheist, '"
 ""You can be elected as an openly gay politician in this country, but you can't be elected as an openly atheistic one", said Lori Lipman Brown, who was hired last fall to be the Washington, D.C., lobbyist for an organization devoted to atheist causes, the Secular Coalition for America. She's believed to be the first paid lobbyist for the unbelievers in the nation's capital, the front lines of the culture wars. Now, all Brown is seeking is a constituency willing to go public. "Think of where the LGBT movement was 25 years ago", said Brown, who has worked on gay and lesbian rights issues as a legislator and attorney. "That's where atheists are today." […] Brown, who is married and was raised a "humanistic Jew", talks about how she "came out" as an atheist several years ago, and how most atheists aren't "out yet" at work. She says atheist kids—like many gay children—are made to feel outcasts at school, and explains that she wants to erase the negative connotation to the word "atheist" just as homosexuals have reclaimed slurs like "queer" and "dyke."" Joe Garofoli, 'Atheists hoping to assert rights in religious era', San Francisco Chronicle, February 20, 2006 (accessed June 16, 2008).
 Godless Americans Political Action Committee national advisory board
 Michigan Godless Americans Political Action Committee
 Hammel, Paul. "Ernie Chambers targets 'so help me God' in oaths". Omaha World-Herald. Archived from the original on 4 September 2013. Retrieved 4 September 2013.
 "I don't believe in God because I don't believe in Mother Goose." Clarence Darrow, speech in Toronto, 1930, as quoted in Breaking the Last Taboo (1996) by James A. Haught.
 "I say that religion is the belief in future life and in God. I don't believe in either." Clarence Darrow, 'Law is 'Horrible' says Darrow, 79', New York Times, April 19, 1936.
 "In spite of all the yearnings of men, no one can produce a single fact or reason to support the belief in God and in personal immortality." Clarence Darrow, Sign magazine, May 1938 (from Rawson's Dictionary of American Quotations via credoreference.com, accessed August 1, 2008).
https://patch.com/connecticut/westport/calendar/event/20171113/258017/agnostic-atheist-state-legislator-to-speak
 Wong, Curtis (2013-08-09). "Barney Frank's 'Pot-Smoking Atheist' Revelation Discussed On 'The Rubin Report'". The Huffington Post. Retrieved 2013-08-09.
 "[Barney] Frank would not have left his safe [Massachusetts] state legislative district to go to Congress if Pope John Paul II had not opened up for him an equally liberal and tolerant district when he ordered Jesuit Father Robert Drinan to resign his seat in the House. The pope thought Drinan too liberal—and in his place he got Frank, a gay Jewish atheist." Garry Wills, "Hampered Brilliance" (a review of Barney Frank, Frank: A Life in Politics from the Great Society to Same-Sex Marriage, Farrar, Straus and Giroux, 387 pp, $28.00), The New York Review of Books, vol. LXII, no. 10 (June 4, 2015), p. 8.
 "Real Time with Bill Maher Episode #149 April 10, 2009". www.veoh.com.
 "He also served a two-year sentence for tax evasion in the 1950s, ran for US president for the Progressive Party, made a great deal of money, and as a militant atheist once pinned down a Catholic archbishop during cross-examination, forcing him to confess he could not prove Heaven existed." Christopher Reed, 'Obituary: Vincent Hallinan, A Brawler for Justice', The Guardian (London), October 6, 1992, Pg. 33.
 https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/acts-of-faith/wp/2017/11/09/this-lawmaker-is-skeptical-that-god-exists-now-hes-finally-decided-to-tell-people/
 [8].
 The Hon. Atheist Governor: Culbert L. Olson Archived 2008-09-23 at the Wayback Machine.
 Stark called himself "a Unitarian who does not believe in a supreme being" and has been identified as an atheist. Rep. Stark applauded for atheist outlook: Believed to be first congressman to declare nontheism, Associated Press, March 13, 2007 (Accessed June 15, 2007)
 "It is long overdue for Atheistic arguments to be given a seat at the table of the marketplace of ideas in today's world. I have established this website in the hope of providing a platform for the dissemination of these arguments." Website of Eddie Tabash (Accessed April 14, 2008)
 "Jesse Ventura". NNDB.com. Retrieved 25 April 2012. Formerly a Lutheran, Ventura generally considers himself an atheist.
 "Jesse Ventura Says "I'm An Atheist"".
 Jesse Ventura said, "I'm an atheist" on CNN's "Piers Morgan Tonight", 17 September 2012.
 "George Will: 'I'm an amiable, low voltage atheist'". The Daily Caller. May 5, 2014. Retrieved September 23, 2014.
 Isaac Chotiner. "George Will Finds His Wild Side – The New Republic". The New Republic.
 "Wolfe, a self-proclaimed atheist, said he recognizes the importance of being open to religious ideas." Sara Esquilin, Atheists. Debate.The. Ethics.Of. NonBelievers-3355090.shtml Celebrated atheists debate the ethics of non-believers, The Daily Free Press, April 29, 2008 (accessed April 30, 2008).
 "I'm an atheist, but I don’t believe that science and religion are by definition incompatible." Andrew Zwicker, Reddit AMA, 13 May 2014 (accessed 9 November 2017).
 Interviewer: "In interviews you have described yourself as "more left than right" and "a militant atheist" in a country that is overwhelmingly Roman Catholic, and where the political left continues to be a minority. Don't you think that most of the public might take your statements as a sign that you might be biased on certain issues?"

Argibay: "On the contrary—if one reads my declarations correctly. I believe that saying up front who one is or what one thinks is an indication of honesty, which is the first step towards impartiality. My beliefs, or lack thereof, should not interfere in the judicial decisions I take." Diana Cariboni, 'Single Woman, Atheist, Heads to Seat on High Court Archived 2007-09-27 at the Wayback Machine.', IPS News, January 21, 2004.
 " She was respectfully called "bhowji" (elder brother's wife) by PPP supporters. Janet remained an atheist and did not convert to Hinduism. "I am an activist. People either hate me to infinity or love me to death", she once told an interviewer." John Cherian, 'Guiding light' (Jagan's obituary), Frontline (India), Volume 26, Issue 08, April 11–24, 2009 (accessed 7 April 2009).
 http://countrystudies.us/paraguay/7.htm
 "La suerte de Chávez es la suerte de muchos: presidente de Uruguay" (in Spanish). El Espectador. May 16, 2012. Retrieved November 11, 2012.
Categories: Lists of atheists
Navigation menu
Not logged inTalkContributionsCreate accountLog inArticleTalkReadEditView historySearch

Search Wikipedia
Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article
Donate to Wikipedia
Wikipedia store
Interaction
Help
About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact page
Tools
What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Permanent link
Page information
Wikidata item
Cite this page
Print/export
Create a book
Download as PDF
Printable version

Languages
Română
Edit links
This page was last edited on 17 March 2018, at 19:53.
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
Privacy policyAbout WikipediaDisclaimersContact WikipediaDevelopersCookie statementMobile viewEnable previews
Wikimedia Foundation Powered by MediaWiki

2018 Asian Men's U20 Volleyball Championship
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
2018 Asian Men's U20 Volleyball Championship
Tournament details
Host nation	 Bahrain
City	Manama
Dates	21–28 July
← PreviousNext →
The 2018 Asian Men's U20 Volleyball Championship will be the nineteenth edition of the Asian Men's U20 Volleyball Championship, a biennial international volleyball tournament organised by the Asian Volleyball Confederation (AVC) with Bahrain Volleyball Association (BVA). The tournament will be held in Manama, Bahrain, from 21 to 28 July 2018.[1][2]

The top two teams of the tournament will qualify for the 2019 FIVB Volleyball Men's U21 World Championship as the AVC representatives.

See also
2018 Asian Women's U19 Volleyball Championship
References
 "Volleyball fever to grip fans across asia in 2018". AVC. Retrieved 30 November 2017.
 "Entry form submission for 2018 AVC tournaments now". AVC. Retrieved 3 December 2017.
External links
Asian Volleyball Confederation
[hide] v t e
Asian Junior Volleyball Championship
Men	
Seoul 1980 Riyadh 1984 Bangkok 1986 Jakarta 1988 Bangkok 1990 Tehran 1992 Doha 1994 Ho Chi Minh City 1996 Tehran 1998 Tehran 2000 Tehran 2002 Doha 2004 Tehran 2006 Tehran 2008 Nakhon Pathom 2010 Urmia 2012 Manama 2014 Kaohsiung 2016 Manama 2018
Women	
1980 1984 1986 1988 1990 1992 1994 1996 1998 2000 2002 2004 2006 2008 2010 2012 2014 2016
Volleyball icon by Arthur Shlain.svgVolleyball portal Flag of Bahrain.svgBahrain portal Sports icon.pngSports portal Samsung Galaxy S5 Vector.svg2010s portal


Stub icon	This article relating to the sport of volleyball is a stub. You can help Wikipedia by expanding it.
Categories: Asian Men's U20 Volleyball Championship2018 in men's volleyballInternational volleyball competitions hosted by Bahrain2018 in Bahraini sportJuly 2018 sports events in AsiaScheduled sports eventsVolleyball stubs
Navigation menu
Not logged inTalkContributionsCreate accountLog inArticleTalkReadEditView historySearch

Search Wikipedia
Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article
Donate to Wikipedia
Wikipedia store
Interaction
Help
About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact page
Tools
What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Permanent link
Page information
Wikidata item
Cite this page
Print/export
Create a book
Download as PDF
Printable version

Languages
Add links
This page was last edited on 18 March 2018, at 19:19.
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
Privacy policyAbout WikipediaDisclaimersContact WikipediaDevelopersCookie statementMobile viewEnable previews
Wikimedia Foundation Powered by MediaWiki

Ivo Mahlknecht
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
Ivo Mahlknecht
Ivo Mahlknecht 1966.jpg
Ivo Mahlknecht after the 1966 World Championships
Personal information
Born	21 May 1939 (age 78)
Urtijëi, Italy
Height	1.82 m (6 ft 0 in)
Weight	87 kg (192 lb)
Sport
Sport	Alpine skiing
Ivo Mahlknecht (born 21 May 1939) is a retired Italian alpine skier. He competed at the 1964 and 1968 Winter Olympics in the downhill, slalom and giant slalom events with the best result of sixth place in the downhill in 1968.[1]

References
 Ivo Mahlknecht Archived 15 December 2012 at the Wayback Machine.. sports-reference.com
External links
	Wikimedia Commons has media related to Ivo Mahlknecht.
Ivo Mahlknecht. fis-ski.com


Stub icon	This biographical article relating to alpine skiing in Italy is a stub. You can help Wikipedia by expanding it.
Categories: 1939 birthsLiving peopleItalian male alpine skiersOlympic alpine skiers of ItalyAlpine skiers at the 1964 Winter OlympicsAlpine skiers at the 1968 Winter OlympicsPeople from UrtijëiGermanophone Italian peopleItalian alpine skiing biography stubs
Navigation menu
Not logged inTalkContributionsCreate accountLog inArticleTalkReadEditView historySearch

Search Wikipedia
Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article
Donate to Wikipedia
Wikipedia store
Interaction
Help
About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact page
Tools
What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Permanent link
Page information
Wikidata item
Cite this page
Print/export
Create a book
Download as PDF
Printable version
In other projects
Wikimedia Commons

Languages
Deutsch
Italiano
Edit links
This page was last edited on 2 July 2017, at 18:08.
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
Privacy policyAbout WikipediaDisclaimersContact WikipediaDevelopersCookie statementMobile viewEnable previews
Wikimedia Foundation Powered by MediaWiki

Tara Grinstead murder case
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
Tara Faye Grinstead
Born	November 14, 1974
Hawkinsville, Georgia
Disappeared	October 23, 2005 (aged 30)
Ocilla, Georgia
Status	Missing for 12 years, 4 months and 20 days
Tara Faye Grinstead (born November 14, 1974) was an American beauty queen and high school history teacher who lived in Ocilla, Georgia, and has been missing since October 23, 2005. Over the span of a decade, it became the largest case file in Georgia's history.[citation needed] On February 23, 2017, a press conference was held by the Georgia Bureau of Investigation (GBI) formally announcing that a tip had been received, leading to the arrest of Ryan Alexander Duke for the murder and concealment of Tara Faye Grinstead.[1] In addition, on March 3, 2017, a supplementary arrest was made public in connection with Tara's disappearance: Bo Dukes (a former classmate of Ryan Alexander Duke, with no familial relation) was charged with attempting to conceal a death, hindering apprehension and tampering with evidence.[2]

Contents 
1	Early life
2	Disappearance
3	Investigation
4	See also
5	References
6	External links
Early life
A native of Hawkinsville, Georgia, Grinstead loved beauty pageants. In 1999, she won the title of Miss Tifton and competed in the Miss Georgia pageant.[3] Her winnings from this pageant and many others she had entered helped her pay for college.[4] She graduated from Middle Georgia College in Georgia and, in 2003, earned a master's degree in education at Valdosta State University. In 1998, she began teaching history at Irwin County High School in Ocilla.[3]

Disappearance
The night before her disappearance, Grinstead visited a beauty pageant (she was active as a coach to young beauty contestants) and attended a barbecue.[5] On October 24, 2005, a Monday morning, she did not show up for work. Co-workers called police, who went to the home where she lived alone. They found her cell phone inside the house. Her car was outside, unlocked. Her purse and keys were gone.[6][7]

Local police immediately called in the Georgia Bureau of Investigation, feeling that "something was wrong" and the case was beyond the resources of the small town police department. The GBI found no signs of forced entry and no sign of a struggle.[5]

Irwin County High School principal Bobby Conner was quoted by the Atlanta Journal and Constitution as saying "We're a small community and this has really touched home because it is something you read about happening elsewhere. This is someone with a tremendous, magnetic personality, and the kids just love her."[8]

Investigation
In 2008, the case received renewed attention with a report on the CBS News show 48 Hours Mystery, which noted the similarity of this case to the disappearance of another young woman, Jennifer Kesse, in Orlando, Florida, three months later.[4]

In connection with that news story, police revealed that they had found DNA on a latex glove that was found in Grinstead's yard, "just a stone's throw from her front stoop", according to a 2008 interview with Gary Rothwell of the Georgia Bureau of Investigation:

Rothwell did not identify as a suspect the person whose DNA was found in the glove, but he said that person could help lead to a break in the case. "We believe it is a critical element to solving the case," Rothwell said.
Rothwell said the DNA has been analyzed and agents know it's a man's DNA. But they haven't identified the man. Over the course of the investigation, he said, agents have compared the DNA to dozens of men who knew Grinstead or who were associated with her. "None of them matched," Rothwell said. The DNA also has been entered into Georgia and national databases, but still no matches."[6]

In February 2009, videos surfaced on the Internet featuring a self-proclaimed serial killer.[9] Dubbing himself the "Catch Me Killer", the man in the videos details what he claims are his 16 female victims, and one of these women was determined by authorities to be Grinstead. Though the man's face and voice are digitally obscured, police eventually determined the videos' source to be 27-year-old Andrew Haley. A police investigation revealed the videos to be part of a bizarre, elaborate hoax, and Haley was ultimately eliminated as a substantial lead in Grinstead's disappearance.[10]

In 2011, the chief GBI investigator said: "this case has never gone cold", adding that leads still come in on a weekly basis.[5][11]

On February 23, 2017, the GBI announced they had received a tip from investigative journalism podcast host[12] Payne Lindsey, this led to the arrest of Ryan Alexander Duke for murder.[13] About three years before Grinstead's disappearance, Duke had attended Irwin County High School, the same high school where Grinstead was employed as a teacher.[14] According to warrants read in court, Duke burglarized Grinstead's home, and when discovered he strangled her and removed her body from the house.[14][15] Another arrest, on March 3, 2017, was made public in connection with Tara's disappearance. Bo Dukes, a former classmate of Ryan with no familial relation, was charged with attempting to conceal a death, hindering apprehension and tampering with evidence. Grinstead's sister, Anita Gattis, said she has known Bo Dukes' family for years but never connected him with any part of her sister's disappearance.[2]

In August 2017, a grand jury filed four new charges against Dukes: two counts of making false statements, one count of hindering apprehension of a criminal and one count of concealing the death of another. These additional charges are based on a Wilcox County indictment stating that Dukes had lied to a GBI official who questioned him in 2016 concerning the disappearance of Grinstead. As of September 7, 2017, no trial date has been scheduled for either Dukes or Duke.[16]

See also
	Criminal Justice portal
	Death portal
flag	Georgia (U.S. state) portal
List of people who disappeared mysteriously
Murder conviction without a body
References
 Tara Grinstead missing: Ex-student used hands to kill teacher in home, warrant says. CBS News / AP, February 24, 2017
 Thomas, Tony (3 March 2017). "Tara Grinstead's sister says she's known suspect's family for years: 'It's unreal'" (video). WSB-TV 2. Atlanta, GA: Cox Media Group.
 Mikkilineni, Rupa. "Missing beauty queen was mending broken heart". Archived from the original on 30 September 2008. Retrieved 19 June 2015.
 "Stolen Beauty". 48 Hours. CBS News. July 1, 2008. Retrieved July 13, 2012.
 Carter, Allen (November 9, 2011). "Special Report: What happened to Tara Grinstead?". mysouthwestga.com. Fox 31. Retrieved July 13, 2012.
 Womack, Amy Leigh (July 1, 2008). "GBI Releases New Info In Tara Grinstead Case". The Telegraph (Macon). Archived from the original on March 25, 2012. Retrieved July 13, 2012.
 "Possible new leads in Tara Grinstead case". WFXL Fox 31. February 16, 2015. Retrieved June 19, 2015.
 Montgomery, Bill (November 3, 2005). "Search finds no clues about missing teacher". Atlanta Journal and Constitution.
 Wright Gazaway (February 11, 2015). "People hope Grinstead case will be solved soon". Retrieved June 19, 2015.
 "Catch me killer says he's guilty of hoax". Atlanta Journal Constitution. Retrieved June 18, 2015.
 Search reopens in disappearance of Tara Grinstead Archived June 20, 2015, at the Wayback Machine. 41 NBC Retrieved June 19, 2015
 "'How I helped solve a decade-old missing person's case with my podcast'". Cosmopolitan. 2018-02-05. Retrieved 2018-03-02.
 Chamberlain, Samuel (February 23, 2017). "Tara Grinstead: Ex-student accused of murdering missing Georgia teacher". Fox News. Retrieved February 28, 2017.
 "Tara Grinstead's murderer used his hands to kill her". Nydailynews.com. Retrieved February 28, 2017.
 "Tara Grinstead was killed during a burglary at her home, warrants say". Macon.com. Retrieved February 28, 2017.
 "Man charged with helping burn beauty queen's body faces new charges". Contributing: WXIA-TV, Atlanta. MACON, Ga.: USA TODAY. 7 September 2017. Retrieved 19 October 2017.
External links
Official website, Family Sanctioned
"Tara Grinstead". Let's Bring Them Home (LBTH). Archived from the original on Apr 26, 2012.
Categories: 2000s missing person casesMissing person cases in the United StatesOctober 2005 events2005 in Georgia (U.S. state)Crimes in Georgia (U.S. state)
Navigation menu
Not logged inTalkContributionsCreate accountLog inArticleTalkReadEditView historySearch

Search Wikipedia
Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article
Donate to Wikipedia
Wikipedia store
Interaction
Help
About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact page
Tools
What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Permanent link
Page information
Wikidata item
Cite this page
Print/export
Create a book
Download as PDF
Printable version

Languages
中文
Edit links
This page was last edited on 9 March 2018, at 14:54.
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
Privacy policyAbout WikipediaDisclaimersContact WikipediaDevelopersCookie statementMobile viewEnable previews
Wikimedia Foundation Powered by MediaWiki

Do Chahi, South Khorasan
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
Do Chahi
دوچاهي
village
Country	 Iran
Province	South Khorasan
County	Qaen
Bakhsh	Central
Rural District	Qaen
Population (2006)
 • Total	56
Time zone	IRST (UTC+3:30)
 • Summer (DST)	IRDT (UTC+4:30)
Do Chahi (Persian: دوچاهي‎, also Romanized as Do Chāhī) is a village in Qaen Rural District, in the Central District of Qaen County, South Khorasan Province, Iran. At the 2006 census, its population was 56, in 17 families.[1]

References
 "Census of the Islamic Republic of Iran, 1385 (2006)". Islamic Republic of Iran. Archived from the original (Excel) on 2011-11-11.
[show] v t e
Iran Qaen County

flag	Iran portal
Stub icon	This Qaen County location article is a stub. You can help Wikipedia by expanding it.
Categories: Populated places in Qaen CountyQaen County geography stubs
Navigation menu
Not logged inTalkContributionsCreate accountLog inArticleTalkReadEditView historySearch

Search Wikipedia
Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article
Donate to Wikipedia
Wikipedia store
Interaction
Help
About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact page
Tools
What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Permanent link
Page information
Wikidata item
Cite this page
Print/export
Create a book
Download as PDF
Printable version

Languages
فارسی
Edit links
This page was last edited on 4 December 2017, at 19:34.
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
Privacy policyAbout WikipediaDisclaimersContact WikipediaDevelopersCookie statementMobile viewEnable previews
Wikimedia Foundation Powered by MediaWiki

Joseph Henry Lumpkin
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
Joseph Henry Lumpkin (December 23, 1799 – June 4, 1867) was the first chief justice of the Supreme Court of the U.S. state of Georgia.[1]

Contents 
1	Biography
1.1	Education
1.2	Career
1.3	University of Georgia School of Law
1.4	Other writings
1.5	Death
2	References
3	See also
4	External links
Biography
Education
Lumpkin attended the University of Georgia (UGA) in Athens, Georgia, for some time and then attended and graduated from Princeton College in 1819. After studying law under the tutelage of Thomas W. Cobb, Lumpkin was admitted to the state bar in 1820, and he began practicing in Lexington, Georgia.

Career
After serving two terms in the Georgia General Assembly, 1824–1825, Lumpkin turned his full attention to his legal career.[2] In 1830, Lumpkin worked in unison with future U.S. Congressman and Georgia Governor, William Schley, and John H. Cuthbert to create the Georgia state penal code.[3]

After the creation of the Supreme Court of Georgia in 1845, Lumpkin was elected as one of three initial justices to preside over that court and was its first chief justice. He served on the court for more than 20 years until his death.[3] Lumpkin was offered the faculty chair of rhetoric and oratory at UGA in 1846, but he declined it. He did the same when offered the chancellorship of UGA in 1860. Even a presidential appointment to a seat on the US Court of Claims was turned down by Lumpkin so that he could remain on the state supreme court.[3]

Lumpkin also had a plantation in Athens, Georgia, where he owned 18 slaves.[4]

University of Georgia School of Law
He was one of three co-founders of the UGA law school in 1859. Originally known as the Lumpkin School of Law;[2] it is now known as the University of Georgia School of Law. Lumpkin taught at the law school until the university shut down during the American Civil War. He also served as a trustee for the school for many years.[3]

Other writings
His writings and policies suggest a mixing of religion, economics, and politics. For Lumpkin, like many in his era, believed that economic and moral progress went together.:

"In the early 1820s Lumpkin underwent an evangelical conversion that profoundly affected his life. He took an active part in the temperance movement on both the national and state levels. He also believed that slavery was sanctioned by the Bible and often cited religious arguments to support continuation of that institution."[2]
However, early in his career he had expressed opposition to slavery.[5] By the time Lumpkin was on the Georgia Supreme Court, he was devoted to promoting slavery. In an 1850 address to the South Carolina Institute, Lumpkin pointed to corporations and to slavery as key to promoting economic development in the South.[6]

Death
Lumpkin died and was buried in Athens on June 4, 1867.[3]

References
 Paul DeForest Hicks (2002). Joseph Henry Lumpkin: Georgia's First Chief Justice. Athens: University of Georgia Press. ISBN 0-8203-2365-9.
 New Georgia Encyclopedia entry for Joseph Henry Lumpkin
 William J. Northen, Men of Mark in Georgia, A. B. Caldwell, 1912, pp.302-307
 United States 1850 Slave Schedule
 Timothy S. Huebner (1999). The Southern Judicial Tradition: State Judges and Sectional Distinctiveness, 1790-1890. University of Georgia Press. ISBN 0-8203-2101-X.
 Alfred L. Brophy, "The Market, Utility, and Slavery in Southern Legal Thought," Slavery's Capitalism: A New History of American Economic Development (Sven Beckert & Seth Rockman eds. 2016): 262, 269.
See also
Joseph Henry Lumpkin House

External links
Family Papers at the Digital Library of Georgia
Preceded by
None	Chief Justices of the Supreme Court of Georgia
1863–1867	Succeeded by
Hiram B. Warner
Authority control	
WorldCat Identities VIAF: 63360458 LCCN: n2001112653 SNAC: w6pn9cmm
Categories: 1799 birthsGeorgia (U.S. state) lawyersUniversity of Georgia alumniUniversity of Georgia faculty1867 deathsChief Justices of the Supreme Court of Georgia (U.S. state)Princeton University alumni
Navigation menu
Not logged inTalkContributionsCreate accountLog inArticleTalkReadEditView historySearch

Search Wikipedia
Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article
Donate to Wikipedia
Wikipedia store
Interaction
Help
About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact page
Tools
What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Permanent link
Page information
Wikidata item
Cite this page
Print/export
Create a book
Download as PDF
Printable version

Languages
Add links
This page was last edited on 3 February 2018, at 02:36.
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
Privacy policyAbout WikipediaDisclaimersContact WikipediaDevelopersCookie statementMobile viewEnable previews
Wikimedia Foundation Powered by MediaWiki

List of Germany national rugby union players
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

This article includes a list of references, but its sources remain unclear because it has insufficient inline citations. Please help to improve this article by introducing more precise citations. (October 2012) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)
List of Germany national rugby union players is a list of people who have played for the Germany national rugby union team. The list only includes players who have played in a Test match.

Note that the "position" column lists the position at which the player made his Test debut, not necessarily the position for which he is best known. A position in parentheses indicates that the player debuted as a substitute.

Contents 
1	Unofficial: Pre-1927
2	Official: From 1927 onwards
3	Notes
4	References
5	External links
Unofficial: Pre-1927
At the 1900 Summer Olympics, Germany was represented by SC 1880 Frankfurt, with the following players being called up:[1]

Germany's International Rugby Capped Players
Number	Name	Position	Date first cap obtained	Opposition
1	Albert Amrhein	no. 8	1900-10-14	v France XV at Paris
2	Hugo Betting	fly-half	1900-10-14	v France XV at Paris
3	Jacob Herrmann	centre	1900-10-14	v France XV at Paris
4	Willy Hofmeister	lock	1900-10-14	v France XV at Paris
5	Hermann Kreuzer	fullback	1900-10-14	v France XV at Paris
6	Arnold Landvoigt	wing	1900-10-14	v France XV at Paris
7	Hans Latscha	prop	1900-10-14	v France XV at Paris
8	Erich Ludwig	wing	1900-10-14	v France XV at Paris
9	Richard Ludwig	flanker	1900-10-14	v France XV at Paris
10	Fritz Müller	prop	1900-10-14	v France XV at Paris
11	Eduard Poppe	flanker	1900-10-14	v France XV at Paris
12	Heinrich Reitz	centre	1900-10-14	v France XV at Paris
13	August Schmierer	scrum-half	1900-10-14	v France XV at Paris
14	Adolf Stockhausen	hooker	1900-10-14	v France XV at Paris
15	Georg Wenderoth	lock	1900-10-14	v France XV at Paris
Official: From 1927 onwards
The official German rugby union teams international history begun on 17 April 1927, when it played France in Paris and lost 5-30. The following players were called up for Germany since:[1]

Germany's International Rugby Capped Players
Number	Name	Position	Date first cap obtained	Opposition
Erwin Thiesies		1934	
Horst Kemmling		1976	
Mark Kuhlmann			
Friedrich Michau			
Sebastien Chaule	wing	2006-11-11	v Moldova at Chisinau
Tim Coly	hooker	2006-11-11	v Moldova at Chisinau
Lars Eckert	fly-half	2006-11-11	v Moldova at Chisinau
Pierre Faber	prop	2006-11-11	v Moldova at Chisinau
Matthieu Franke	fullback	2006-11-11	v Moldova at Chisinau
Colin Grzanna	centre	2006-11-11	v Moldova at Chisinau
Mustafa Güngör	scrum-half	2006-11-11	v Moldova at Chisinau
Christian Hug	lock	2006-11-11	v Moldova at Chisinau
Tim Kasten	flanker	2006-11-11	v Moldova at Chisinau
Jens Schmidt	lock	2006-11-11	v Moldova at Chisinau
Steffen Thier	no. 8	2006-11-11	v Moldova at Chisinau
Gerrit van Look	flanker	2006-11-11	v Moldova at Chisinau
Clemens von Grumbkow	centre	2006-11-11	v Moldova at Chisinau
Christopher Weselek	wing	2006-11-11	v Moldova at Chisinau
Alexander Widiker	prop	2006-11-11	v Moldova at Chisinau
Kehoma Brenner	(replacement)	2006-11-11	v Moldova at Chisinau [2]
Kieron Davies	(replacement)	2006-11-11	v Moldova at Chisinau
Manuel Wilhelm	(replacement)	2006-11-11	v Moldova at Chisinau
Benjamin Danso	(replacement)	2006-11-18	v Belgium at Heidelberg
Benjamin Simm	(replacement)	2006-11-18	v Belgium at Heidelberg
Benjamin Krause		2007-02-24	v Wales Development XV at Pontypridd
Franck Moutsinga		2007-02-24	v Wales Development XV at Pontypridd
Sascha Fischer		2007-02-24	v Wales Development XV at Pontypridd
Klaus Mainzer		2007-02-24	v Wales Development XV at Pontypridd
Krystian Trochowski		2007-02-24	v Wales Development XV at Pontypridd
Sebastian Werle		2007-02-24	v Wales Development XV at Pontypridd
Michael Kerr		2007-02-24	v Wales Development XV at Pontypridd
Christopher Parnham		2007-02-24	v Wales Development XV at Pontypridd
Bodo Sieber	lock	2007-04-21	v Ukraine at Kiev
Timur Tekkal	flanker	2007-04-21	v Ukraine at Kiev
Marten Strauch	(replacement)	2007-04-21	v Ukraine at Kiev
Marcus Trick	(replacement)	2007-04-21	v Ukraine at Kiev
Thorsten Wiedemann		2007-09-29	v Switzerland at Frankfurt [3]
Alexander Hug		2007-09-29	v Switzerland at Frankfurt [3]
Dennis Walger		2007-09-29	v Switzerland at Frankfurt [3]
Raphael Pyrasch		2007-09-29	v Switzerland at Frankfurt [3]
Christian Baracat		2007-09-29	v Switzerland at Frankfurt [3]
Rolf Wacha		2007-09-29	v Switzerland at Frankfurt [3]
Markus Walger	wing	2007-11-10	v Belgium at Brussels
Steve Williams	prop	2007-11-24	v Moldova at Heidelberg [4]
Alexander Pipa	no. 8	2008-04-19	v Ukraine at Hanover
Edmoore Takaendesa	fullback	2008-04-19	v Ukraine at Hanover
Juan Martin Goity	wing	2008-11-08	v Wales Development XV at Berlin [5]
Udo Schwarz	wing	2008-11-08	v Wales Development XV at Berlin [5]
Robert Mohr	no. 8	2008-11-15	v Spain at Madrid
Benjamin Brierley	wing	2009-02-07	v Georgia at Heidelberg [6]
Michael Poppmeier	no. 8	2009-02-07	v Georgia at Heidelberg
Damien Tussac	(replacement)	2009-02-07	v Georgia at Heidelberg
Christopher Liebig	(replacement)	2009-02-21	v Portugal at Lisbon
Domenick Davies	fullback	2009-05-02	v Russia at Hanover
Rob Elloway	(replacement)	2009-05-02	v Russia at Hanover
Jamie Houston	hooker	2009-12-12	v Hong Kong at Heidelberg [7]
Benjamin Ulrich	centre	2009-12-12	v Hong Kong at Heidelberg [7]
Anjo Buckman	(replacement)	2009-12-12	v Hong Kong at Heidelberg [7]
Raphael Hackl	(replacement)	2009-12-12	v Hong Kong at Heidelberg [7]
Alexander Hauck	(replacement)	2009-12-12	v Hong Kong at Heidelberg [7]
Daniel Preussner	(replacement)	2009-12-12	v Hong Kong at Heidelberg [7]
Patrick Schliwa	(replacement)	2009-12-12	v Hong Kong at Heidelberg [7]
Mark Sztyndera	(replacement)	2009-12-12	v Hong Kong at Heidelberg [7]
Shalva Didebashvili	flanker	2010-02-06	v Georgia at Tbilisi
Guillaume Franke	fly-half	2010-02-06	v Georgia at Tbilisi
Lukas Hinds-Johnson	lock	2010-02-06	v Georgia at Tbilisi
Steffen Liebig	fullback	2010-02-06	v Georgia at Tbilisi
Lukas Rosenthal	no. 8	2010-02-06	v Georgia at Tbilisi
Alexander Metz	flanker	2010-02-13	v Romania at Constanta [8]
Fabian Heimpel	fly-half	2010-02-27	v Portugal at Heusenstamm [9]
Gilles Pagnon	centre	2010-03-13	v Russia at Sochi [10]
James Keinhorst	wing	2010-11-20	v Poland at Frankfurt
Arthur Zeiler	prop	2010-11-20	v Poland at Frankfurt
Tim Menzel	(replacement)	2010-11-20	v Poland at Frankfurt
Sven Wetzel	(replacement)	2010-11-20	v Poland at Frankfurt
Sam Henderson	flanker	2010-11-27	v Netherlands at Amsterdam
Nico Kanning	(replacement)	2010-11-27	v Netherlands at Amsterdam
Bastian Himmer	wing	2010-12-11	v Hong Kong at Heidelberg
Jannis Läpple	(replacement)	2010-12-11	v Hong Kong at Heidelberg
Daniel Armitage	lock	2011-03-12	v Czech Republic at Heidelberg
Pieter Jordaan	centre	2011-03-19	v Belgium at Brussels
Gilles Valette	hooker	2011-04-02	v Moldova at Chişinău
Felix Bayer	prop	2011-04-02	v Moldova at Chişinău
Notes
^[1] Scrum.com, the main source for this list, lists Germany games from the Moldova game in November 2006 onwards and ignores all debuts made before that date. Players not individually referenced may have had their debuts before November 2006.
References
 Die Gründerjahre des deutschen Rugbysports Archived 2007-10-25 at the Wayback Machine. (in German) DRV website - Foundation years, accessed: 25 February 2010
 Moldova - Germany (in German) totalrugby.de, published: 11 November 2006, accessed: 27 February 2010
 Dennis Walger, Thorsten Wiedemann, Raphael Pyrasch, Rolf Wacha, Christian Baracat and Alexander Hug all made their debut in Germany's game against Switzerland on 29 September 2007.
 Germany - Moldavia (in German) totalrugby.de, published: 24 November 2007, accessed: 26 February 2010
 Deutsche Aufstellung für Spiel gegen Wales Amateure[permanent dead link] (in German) Rugby-Journal, published: 8 November 2008, accessed: 25 February 2010
 Germany - Georgia (in German) totalrugby.de, published: 7 February 2009, accessed: 27 February 2010
 Deutschland besiegt Hongkong mit 24:14 (16:0)[permanent dead link] (in German) Rugby-Journal, published: 12 December 2009, accessed: 25 February 2010
 Rumänien gegen Deutschland in Constanza[permanent dead link] (in German) Rugby-Journal, published: 11 February 2010, accessed: 25 February 2010
 Kader für EM-Spiel gegen Portugal nominiert[permanent dead link] (in German) Rugby-Journal, published: 19 February 2010, accessed: 25 February 2010
 EM-Division 1: DRV-Kader für Spiel in Russland[permanent dead link] (in German) Rugby-Journal, published: 4 March 2010, accessed: 14 March 2010
External links
(in German) Deutscher Rugby-Verband - Official Site
(in German) TotalRugby.de German rugby website with news and results
Germany at RugbyData.com Statistics and results
Rugby International News - Germany
[show] v t e
Germany national rugby union team
[show] v t e
Rugby union players by nations
Categories: Lists of German sportspeopleGermany international rugby union playersLists of international rugby union players by team
Navigation menu
Not logged inTalkContributionsCreate accountLog inArticleTalkReadEditView historySearch

Search Wikipedia
Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article
Donate to Wikipedia
Wikipedia store
Interaction
Help
About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact page
Tools
What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Permanent link
Page information
Wikidata item
Cite this page
Print/export
Create a book
Download as PDF
Printable version

Languages
Add links
This page was last edited on 25 December 2017, at 10:08.
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
Privacy policyAbout WikipediaDisclaimersContact WikipediaDevelopersCookie statementMobile viewEnable previews
Wikimedia Foundation Powered by MediaWiki
